# Base and Superstructure

## Base and Superstructure

In Chapters One through Four, we have studied
the concepts which enable us to understand the
economic structure of society. The detailed and
rigorous study of this structure is fundamental,
since, by beginning with it we can understand the
other levels of society.

Marx and Engels used the terms **infrastructure**
or **base** for the economic structure of society, and
**superstructure** for the juridico-political institutions,
the state, the law, etc., and the "forms of
social consciousness" which correspond to a given
base.

In *Anti-Duhring*, Engels says:

> ...the economic structure of society always
forms the real basis from which, in the last
analysis, is to be explained the whole superstructure
of legal and political institutions,
as well as of the religious, philosophical,
and other conceptions of each
historical period[^5.1].

By means of the notions of base and superstructure,
Marx and Engels expressed the relationship
which exists between the economic level of society
and the juridico-political and ideological ("forms
of social consciousness") levels.

In the same manner that the foundation is the
base on which a building is constructed, the
economic structure is the base of the entire social
edifice.

One of Marx and Engels' great contributions
is the discovery that to study society we should
not start with what human beings say, imagine, or
think, but with the manner in which they produce
the material goods they need for their lives.

> It is always the direct relationship of the
  owners of the conditions of production to the
  direct producers -- a relation always
  naturally corresponding to a definite stage
  in the development of the methods of labor
  and thereby its social productivity -- which
  reveals the innermost secret, the hidden
  basis of the entire social structure, and
  with it the political form of the relation of
  sovereignty and dependence, in short, the
  corresponding specific form of the state.
  This does not prevent the same economic basis
  -- the same from the standpoint of its main
  conditions -- due to innumerable different
  empirical circumstances, natural environment,
  racial relations, external historical
  influences, etc., from showing infinite variations
  and gradations in appearance, which
  can be ascertained only by analysis of the
  empirically given circumstances[^5.2].

The notion of **superstructure** designates,
therefore, two levels of society: the juridico-political
structure and the ideological structure.
To the former corresponds the state and the law;
to the latter the so-called "forms of social
consciousness."


## Superstructure: a Problematical Notion

That we have employed the term "notion" in
speaking about the superstructure is no mere accident,
but is due to the fact that it has not been
studied in a finished form by Marxists.

Can we say, for example, that everything that
occurs in a society which does not pertain to the
economic instance must be considered as a
phenomenon belonging to the superstructure?

Stalin, in his article, "Concerning Marxism
in Linguistics," states that language was a
phenomenon that belonged neither to the superstructure
nor to the base.

In a letter in which he refers to this
article, he says:

> Briefly, language cannot be ranked either
> among bases or among superstructures.
>
> Neither can it be ranked among "intermediate"
> phenomena between the base and the superstructure,
> as such "intermediate" phenomena do not
> exist[^5.3].

At the same time, Althusser, in criticizing
Gramsci, maintains that science is a phenomenon
which cannot be ranked under the category of
superstructure.

> To make science a superstructure is to think
of it as one of those "organic" ideologies
which form such a close "bloc" with the
structure that they have the same "history"
as it does[^5.4].

If the concept of superstructure does not
account for all extra-economic phenomena, what
should be the concept that does? This is a
theoretical problem that Marxism has to resolve.

## The Relations Between Base and Superstructure

According to Marxist theory, we must look to
the base for the "guiding thread" to explain
the social phenomena which belong to the superstructure.
But this statement does not imply that
everything is a reduction to or a simple reflection
of economics.

Nevertheless, many texts of Marx and Engels
lend themselves to this type of interpretation,
due to the excessive emphasis which they give to
the role which the economic structure plays within
society.

We must ask ourselves, therefore, what led
Marx and Engels to employ this excessive emphasis.

It is necessary to recall that, in the
historical moment in which they wrote, there was a
strong idealist current which attributed the cause
of social phenomena to the will and the thought of
man, deprecating the role of material existence.
Even the most advanced thinkers such as the French
and English materialists of the 17th and 18th
Centuries and the German materialist Ludwig
Feuerbach continued to maintain idealist principles
when they tried to explain the phenomena of social
existence, the history of societies.

Idealist theologians and philosophers,
bourgeois sociologists and historians, all the
ideologues of the feudal aristocracy and of the
great and petty bourgeoisie saw in consciousness,
reason, political, moral, and religious ideas the
fundamental and determinant motor force of the
development of society.

Let us see how Marx criticizes this idealism
in a letter to Annenkov of December 28, 1846, in
which he talks about Proudhon's book, *The
Philosophy of Poverty*:

> M. Proudhon sees in history a definite series
  of social developments; he finds progress
  realized in history... He cannot explain
  these facts, and the hypothesis of the universal
  reason manifesting itself is made out
  of whole cloth. Nothing is easier than to
  invent mystical causes, that is to say,
  phrases which lack common sense[^5.5].

In order to combat positions of this type,
Marx and Engels, in certain texts, went to the
opposite extreme. These texts, taken out of
their context and the ideological struggle in
which they were written, have led to false
interpretations.

For example, the following passage from *The
German Ideology*:

> ...conceiving, thinking, the mental intercourse
  of men, appear at this stage as the
  direct efflux of their material behaviour.

And later, on the same page:

> ...morality, religion, metaphysics, all the
  rest of ideology and their corresponding
  forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain
  the semblance of independence[^5.6].

The uncritical, mechanical interpretation of
texts such as these has given birth to a simplification
of Marxism.

Certain Marxists, those whom Lenin called
"vulgar Marxists," strain themselves to deduce
directly from economy all the phenomena produced
at the juridico-political and ideological level.

In the case of the ideology philosophy, for
example, they try to deduce the concepts of matter
and spirit from the social relations of production,
The concept of matter would correspond to the
proletariat (material labor) and the concept of
spirit, would correspond to the capitalists (the
work of organization and administration which is
not labor of a material type).

Lenin energetically rejected such over simplification,
pointing out that these concepts were
produced more than 2,000 years ago by philosophers
who belonged to entirely different classes.

This same "vulgar Marxism" is found at the
root of the errors committed by the Mensheviks in
the period before the October Revolution. According
to Lenin, they:

> had learned from memory that the democratic
  revolution has as its base the bourgeois
  revolution and took this to mean that it was
  necessary to reduce the democratic tasks of
  the proletariat to the level of bourgeois
  moderation.

What they could not see, given their economist
deviation, was the fundamental role of the political
aspect in the stage of transition, and for
that reason they could not grasp the basic difference
between a bourgeois democratic revolution
carried out by the bourgeoisie and a democratic
revolution of a new type, which is one that completes
bourgeois-democratic tasks under the leadership
of the proletariat and which has as its
ultimate purpose the establishment of Socialism.
Those Marxists reduced society to its economic
structure. They lost sight of the other levels,
and what is much more serious, lost sight of the
necessity to organize a vanguard party which is
capable of leading a revolutionary transformation
of society on the surest road to socialism and
then to communism.

We should repeat for the vulgar Marxists the
phrase from Engels' letter of January 25, 1894, to
Starkenburg: that there does not exist "an automatic
effect" of the economic situation[^5.7].

It is necessary to show them that if Marx and
Engels did accentuate the economic side, it was
owing to the nature of their adversaries. They had
to "emphasize the main principle" denied by their
adversaries and they "had not always the time, the
place, or the opportunity to give their due to the
other elements involved in the interaction."[^5.8]

Studying the political works of Marx and
Engels is the clearest proof of the importance
they attributed to the other levels of society,
and above all to revolutionary action, the product
of the class struggle.

With respect to the role of the economic
level, Marx and Engels said the following:

> ...if somebody twists this into saying that
  the economic element is the *only* determining
  one, he transforms that proposition into a
  meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase[^5.9].

Economic conditions are the "ultimately determinant"
conditions, but the other instances of society
also play a role:

> Political, juridical, philosophical, religious,
  literary, artistic, etc., development
  is based on economic development. But all
  these react upon one another and also upon
  the economic basis, ...which ultimately
  always asserts itself.[^5.10]

<!-- TODO izzy: This could be a nice place for the stable/low-energy submanifold/surface analogy -->

The elements of the superstructure are linked,
directly or indirectly, to the changes taking
place in the base, but they have a relative
autonomy and their development is guided by
specific laws.

Engels showed how the development of
philosophy, for example, cannot be explained
purely and simply from economic development:

> The philosophy of every epoch, since it is a
  definite sphere in the division of labor, has
  as its presupposition certain definite
  thought material handed down to it by its
  predecessors, from which it takes its start.
  And that is why economically backward
  countries can still play first fiddle in
  philosophy.[^5.11]

We can say, therefore, that certain ideological
elements can exist which are transmitted from
one social formation to another, but that these
elements are always put at the service of the
interests of the dominant classes, for whom they
serve as instruments of struggle. The radical
transformation of the superstructure and its
replacement by a new one does not exclude the
continuation of some elements.

If the economic level mechanically determined
the entire superstructure and the development of
society, then Marx and Engels would have fallen
into an absurd contradiction: to call for class
struggle and revolution when everything would have
already been predetermined by the economy.

This is one of the points most frequently
repeated by the critics of Marxism, They take
pleasure in pointing out the "logical incoherence"
of Marxist theory. On one hand, the assertion
of determination by the economic level, and on the
other, the assertion of the necessity of human
action in history. This criticism only reveals
the ignorance or bad faith of those who formulate
it. They seem to forget the radical difference
between Marxist determination and mechanical
determinism.

Engels wrote the following to Franz Mehring
about this problem:

> Hanging together with this is the fatuous
  notion of the ideologists that because we
  deny an independent historical development to
  the various ideological spheres which play a
  part in history we also deny them any *effect
  upon history*. The basis of this is the common
  undialectical conception of cause and
  effect as rigidly opposite poles, the total
  disregarding of interaction. These gentlemen
  often almost deliberately forget that once an
  historical element has been brought into the
  work by other, ultimately economic causes, it
  reacts, can react on its environment and even
  on the causes that have given rise to it.[^5.12]

Unfortunately, Marx and Engels were not able
to develop systematically and profoundly the problem
of the determinism specific to Marxism.

Althusser says in this respect:

> The proposal to think the determination of
  the elements of a whole by the structure of
  the whole posed an absolutely new problem in
  the most theoretically embarrassing circumstances;
  for there were no philosophical concepts
  available for its resolution.[^5.13]

## Summary
The first part of this chapter, rather than
developing the theme of base and superstructure,
is more a warning concerning the precarious
state of Marxist investigation about what is meant
by "superstructure." The second part tries to
show that Marx and Engels never reduced the superstructure
to the base. The juridico-political
and ideological structures, which form
part of the superstructure, have a relative
autonomy in relation to the base and
their own laws of operation and development.

### Questions
1. What is meant by base and superstructure? 
2. Why does the concept of superstructure require further elaboration? 
3. What is the relationship between base and superstructure?
4. Why did Marx and Engels emphasize to such a great extent the role of the economy?
5. What is the difference between mechanistic determinism and Marxist determinism in general?

### Themes for Reflection
1. In what sense can we say that science depends
  on the economy; and in what sense can we say
  that it does not? How can we combine these
  two statements?
2. Is it possible to speak of superstructure in
  the case of the transition from capitalism to
  socialism, where the superstructure appears
  to be moving ahead of the economic structure?
3. How can the non-contradiction between Marxist
  economic determinism and "human action in
  history" be precisely formulated?

[^5.1]: Frederick Engels, *Anti-Duhring* (Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1962), p. 41.
[^5.2]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol. III (International, 1967), pp. 791-92.
[^5.3]: Joseph Stalin, *Marxism and Linguistics* (International, 1951), p. 34.
[^5.4]: Louis Althusser, *Reading Capital* (Pantheon, 1970), p. 133.
[^5.5]: Marx and Engels, *Selected Correspondence* (Progress, 1965), p. 34.
[^5.6]: Marx and Engels, *The German Ideology* (International, 1939), p. 14.
[^5.7]: *Selected Correspondence*, p. 467.
[^5.8]: Ibid., p. 418.
[^5.9]: Ibid., p. 417.
[^5.10]: Ibid., p. 467.
[^5.11]: Ibid., p. 424.
[^5.12]: Ibid., p. 460.
[^5.13]: *Reading Capital*, p. 187.
