# The Ideological Structure

## Introduction[^6.1]

In the previous chapters we have seen that
Marxist theory holds that in all societies there
are three levels: the economic level, the juridico-political
level, and the ideological level.
The articulation of these three levels among
themselves is a complex set of relationships,
with the economic level being determinant in the
last instance.

If we use Marx and Engels' architectural
metaphor of a building with a foundation or infrastructure
and a superstructure which rests on
this foundation, it can be said the ideology
belongs to the superstructure. But ideology is
not limited to being solely an instance of the
superstructure, it exists in other parts of the
social structure as well, **it is the cement that
holds the building together**. Ideology makes
people adhere to their roles, their functions,
and their social relations.

Ideology penetrates into all human activities,
including the economic and political
practices, It appears in their attitudes toward
the requirements of production, the conception
that the workers have of the mechanism of production.
It is present in political attitudes
and judgements, in cynicism, in honesty, in resignation,
and in rebellion. It governs family
behavior, relations with other persons and with
nature. It is present in our judgements about
"the meaning of life", etc.

Ideology is present to such a degree in all
of people's acts and gestures that it becomes 
*indiscernible from their lived experience*
and, for this reason, all our immediate analyses of "life"
are profoundly marked by the action of ideology.

When we think that we are faced with a clear
and unobstructed perception of reality or with a
pure practice, what we really have is a perception
or practice which is "impure", influenced by
the invisible structures of ideology. Since one
does not perceive his/her own actions, one tends
to take one's perceptions of things and of the
world as perceptions of the "thing itself" without
realizing that this perception only takes
place under the distorting action of ideology.

## The Content of the Ideological Level

The ideological level is, therefore, an objective
reality, indispensable for the existence
of every society, even a communist society.
What is the content of this level? It is
formed by two kinds of systems: *the system of
ideas and social representations* (ideology in
the strict sense) and the *system of attitudes
and social behavior* (customs).

The **system of ideas and social representations**
includes the political, juridical, moral,
religious, aesthetic, and philosophical ideas of
mankind in a given society. These ideas are
given in the form of different views of the
world and of man's role in it. Ideologies are
not objective, scientific representations of the
world, but representations filled with imaginary
elements; rather than describe reality, they
express desires, hopes, nostalgia. Ideologies can
contain elements of knowledge, but what
predominate are those elements which have the *function
of adapting to reality*. Human beings live their relations
to the world within ideology.

It is this which transforms their consciousness,
their attitudes and their conduct in order to
adjust them to their duties and conditions of
existence. For example: religious ideology
which treats the issues and feelings around
suffering and death gives the exploited the
ideas that permit them to better endure their
conditions of existence.

**The system of attitudes and social behaviors**
is made up of all the habits, customs, and tendencies
necessary to act in a certain way. It
is easier for someone to change his view of the
world, that is, his ideology in the strict sense,
than to change his customary ways of living and
dealing practically with crucial situations. For
this reason ideology in the strict sense and
system of attitudes and behaviors are not always
identical. The dialectical relations that are
established between them range from total or
partial correlation to contradiction.

It is important to pay attention to the system
of attitudes and behaviors, since through it
are expressed specific ideological tendencies.
Thus, for example, certain *customs*, "work habits"
a certain "style of leadership and command"
which can be contrary to proletarian ideology can
be found in socialist militants or leaders.
These work habits and styles of leadership can,
if they are permitted become widespread, and
hence become signs of social distinction (conscious
or unconscious) in the ideological class
struggle. The bureaucratic or technocratic behavior
of some Marxist leaders reveals the penetration
of bourgeois ideology into the ranks of
the working class.

## Ideology and the Social Classes[^6.2]

We have seen that both in a classless
society and in a class society ideology has the
function of reinforcing a given relation of,
human beings with each other and with their condition
of existence, adapting individuals to
the tasks that society sets for them.

In class society this function is dominated
by the way human beings are divided into classes.
Ideology, in this case, is supposed to *assure
that people remain in the general structure of
class exploitation*. It is supposed to assure
the domination of one class over the rest,
making the exploited accept the conditions of
their exploitation as if they were based on the
"will of God", or "nature" or "moral duty", etc.

But ideology is not simply a "pious lie"
invented by the exploiters to trick the exploited.
It serves them as a bond of social
cohesion that they act as members of the same
class, that of exploiters. The "pious lie" of
ideology has, thus, a double purpose: it is exercised
over the consciousness of the exploited
to make them accept as natural their
condition of being exploited and is exercised over
the members of the dominant class to permit
them to practice, in a natural way, their exploitation
and domination.

## Ideology and Structure

Ideology, like all of social reality, is
only intelligible through its structure. Ideology
brings with it representations, images,
signs, etc., but these elements mean nothing in
isolation. It is the system of ideology, its
mode of combining its elements that give them
meaning; it is its structure that determines its
significance and its function. Since it is determined
by its *structure*, ideology is greater
than the sum of all the ways in which it is
lived by one or another individual. Ideology,
therefore, is not reducible to the individual
forms in which it is Lived, and for this reason
it can be the *object of objective study*. For
this reason we can speak of the nature of ideology
and examine it.

## Ideological regions

The objective study of ideology enables us
to see that, in spite of its being a reality
that is diffused throughout the entire social
body, it can be divided, into particular regions,
centered around different themes. In this way
we can distinguish relatively autonomous regions
in the heart of the ideological realm for example:
moral, religious, juridical, political,
aesthetic, and philosophical ideology, etc.

Not all of these regions have always existed
in history. It is possible to foresee that
certain ones will disappear or be mixed with
others in the course of the history of socialism
and communism.

In relation to the social classes which
exist in different societies, one or another
region dominates the others. In this way we can
explain, for example, the remarks of Marx and
Engels about the dominant influence of religious ideology
in all the movements of peasant rebellion from
the XIVth century to the XVIIIth, and even in
certain primitive forms in the workers' movement,
Religious ideology seems to dominate as an
ideological region in the history of certain oppressed
races, as with black people in the US.

## Practical Ideologies and Theoretical ideologies

In each of the previously mentioned regions,
ideology can exist in two forms:

1. a more or less diffuse, unreflective form or as a *practical ideology*
2. a more or less conscious, systematized and reflective form, as a *theoretical ideology*.

We know that religious ideologies can exist
which have rules, rites, etc. without having a
theological system; the appearance of a theology
represents a higher level of theoretical systematization
of religious ideology. The same
occurs within the other regions of ideology.
They can exist under a non-theoretical, unsystematic
form, the form of customs, tendencies,
preferences, etc. Or, on the contrary,
under a systematic and reflective form
like moral "theory", political "theory", etc.
The highest theoretical form of ideology is
philosophy in the traditional sense of the
word. It is important to clarify here
that these "theoretical ideologies" can contain
scientific elements, but since these elements
are contained within an ideological structure,
they can provide only partial knowledge which
is distorted or limited by its location within
this structure.

## Ideological tendencies

Not only are there areas or regions of
ideology, but there exist, in addition, different
ideological tendencies.

By stating that "the ruling ideas are the
ideas of the ruling class," Marx shows us how
to study diverse ideological tendencies. In
the same way that there are dominant classes
and dominated classes, there are dominant and
dominated ideologies.

Therefore, within the ideological level
in gen.er al, we can observe the existenoe of
*different ideological tendencies which express
the "representations" of the different social
classes*: bourgeois ideology, petty-bourgeois, and proletarian
ideology.

But we should not lose sight of the fact
that in, capitalist societies petty-bourgeois and
proletarian ideologies are *subordinated* to those
of the ruling class, which always win out
despite the protests of the exploited. This
scientific truth is of decisive importance in
understanding the history of the workers' movement
and of communist practice. What does Marx
mean when he says that bourgeois ideology dominates
the other ideologies, particularly
proletarian ideology? It means that worker protest
against exploitation is expressed within
the very structure of the system, and to a
large  degree, within the representations and
frames of reference of dominant bourgeois
ideology, for example the workers' struggle for
greater purchasing power for consumer goods.
The pressure of bourgeois ideology is such that
the working class cannot, by itself, free
from that ideology. What it can do is to express
its protests and hopes, using certain
elements of bourgeois ideology, but it continues
being its prisoner, locked into the dominant structure.
In order for spontaneous worker
ideology to be transformed to a point of being liberated from bourgeois ideology,
it is necessary that it receive from outside the aid of science and that it
be transformed under the influence of this new elements, radically different from
ideology.

The fundamental Leninist thesis of "importing", or the necessary "fusion" of
Marxist theory with the workers' movement is neither, therefore, an arbitrary thesis
nor the description of an accident of history. It is based, on the contrary, on
the very nature of ideology and the absolute limits of the natural development of the
spontaneous ideology of the working class.

## The Origin of the Deformed and Distorted Character of Ideological Representations[^6.3]

Ideologies contain an element of knowledge
of reality, but this is always found integrated
into a whole system of representation which,
from its inception, is a deformed and distorted
system of reality.

What is the origin of the necessarily deformed
and distorted character of ideology?

Does it originate in the necessity of the
ruling class to deceive the classes which it
subordinates in order to maintain its domination
over them?

In order to answer this question, let us
first analyze the limits of all spontaneous consciousness
of reality.

To do this we shall use one of Marx's analyses
from Volume III of *Capital*, Chapter IX,
about the general rate of profit.

Let us briefly put in context the paragraphs
that interest us. In this chapter Marx
shows that originally the rates of profit of
each branch of production differ greatly, one
from another, but that, through the effect of
competition, these rates tend to be equalized
in an average rate of profit. The prices of
production, in the capitalist system of production,
are established by adding to the cost of
production of commodities a percentage of profit
calculated on the basis of the average rate of
profit. This means that the individual capitalist
does not receive exactly the surplus value
which he produces. From the mass of surplus
value produced in a given period by total social
capital, he receives only a quantity proportional
to the capital he has invested.

This is, in brief, what Marx says in the
following text:

> The various different capitals here are
  in the position of shareholders in a joint-stock company, in which
  the dividends are evenly distributed for each 100 units, and hence
  are distinguished, as far as the individual capitalists are concerned,
  only according to the size of the capital that each of them
  has put into the common enterprise, according to his relative
  participation in this common enterprise, according to the number
  of his shares. While the portion of this commodity price that
  replaces the parts of the capital that are consumed in the production
  of the commodities, and with which these capital values
  must be bought back again - while this portion, the cost price, is
  completely governed by the outlay within each respective sphere
  of production, the other component of commodity price, the profit
  that is added to this cost price, is governed not by the mass of
  profit that is produced by this specific capital in its specific sphere of
  production, but by the mass of profit that falls on average to each
  capital invested, as an aliquot part of the total social capital
  invested in the total production, during a given period of time[^6.4].

[^6.4]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol. III, Penguin, pp. 258.

A few pages later, Marx shows how this separation --
between the surplus value produced by
the capitalist and the profit received for the
capital he has invested -- affects the consciousness
of the agents of production.

> The actual difference in magnitude between profit and surplus-value in the
  various spheres of production...now completely conceals the true
  nature and origin of profit, not only for the capitalist, who has
  here a particular interest in deceiving himself, but also for the
  worker[^6.5].

And a few later he remarks:

[^6.5]: Ibid., pp. 268.

> the practical capitalist, imprisoned in the competitive struggle and
  in no way penetrating the phenomena it exhibits, cannot but be
  completely incapable of recognizing, behind the semblance, the
  inner essence and the inner form of this process[^6.6].

[^6.6]: Ibid., pp. 269.

We can thus draw some important conclusions
for the study of ideology from this analysis by
Marx.

Marx indicates that the fundamental base
of the capitalist economic structure (that is,
surplus value, the true source of profit) is
completely hidden from the consciousness of the
agents of production (the capitalists and workers).
From this we can conclude that the perception
which the agents of production have of
the production process, even those who form part
of the ruling class, is a deformed and distorted
perception. This deformation of reality does
not, therefore, come from the will of the ruling
class to deceive, but rather from the objective
character of the economic system as such (that
is to say, the difference in size between surplus
value and profit).

We can, therefore, conclude that the distortion
of reality property by ideological knowledge
is not explained by a kind of "bad conscience"
or "the will to deceive" of the ruling
classes but rather is owed fundamentally to the
*necessary opaqueness of social realities that
are complex structures that can only be known
through a scientific analysis of them*.

In effect, in their real lives, people find themselves
effectively determined by *objective structures*
(relations of production, class political
relations, etc.). Moreover, their everyday life convinces
them of the existence of these realities, it
makes them perceive *some objective effects* of
the action of these structures, but it conceals
their essence. They cannot, through simple perception,
arrive at a true *knowledge* of these
structures. The knowledge of the mechanisms of
the different social structures can only be the
result of another activity different from the
simple perception that comes from everyday life:
*scientific* activity.

In the same way knowledge of the laws of
nature cannot be the product either of simple,
technical activity or of simple perception,
which only provide observations, empirical knowledge
and technical recipes.
On the contrary, it must be the product of
a distinct activity, different from immediate
activities: *the scientific activity*. Thus knowledge of
social realities cannot be the product of the simple perception
or experience of said realities, but, on the contrary,
the product of a *scientific activity, that perceives "behind the
semblance, the essence and inner form" of these realities.*

This is the real reason for the existence
of ideology as a deformed and distorted representation.
This is the real reason which allows
us to understand why, even in classless societies,
ideology will continue to exist. The
particular forms of ideology can vary tremendously,
from the myths of primitive societies
to the different ideological forms of modern
society, (moral, religious, aesthetic, juridical,
political ideology, etc.) but in every
society, class or not, ideology survives as
necessarily deformed and distorted knowledge.
The effect of this deformation can be greater or
lesser, and it continues to exist so long as its
cause exists: the structural nature of society
which produces ideology as one of its organic
effects.

It is erroneous, therefore, to believe that
the deformed and distorted character of ideology
is owed to pure and simple ignorance or to a
myth totally cooked up by a group and a class,
Marxism has broken with this conception of ideology,
which was, basically, an idealist conception.

Now then, in class societies this first deformation
is combined with a supplementary deformation
which dominates the first. One of the fundamental
attainments of Marxist theory is precisely
the affirmation that in a class society
ideology is always class ideology, whose content
is determined by the class struggle, and in which
society the dominant ideology is the ideology of
the dominant class.

However, if this truth is considered in isolation,
ones runs the risk of thinking that ideology
is not just the instrument utilized by one class to
exploit the other; the risk of thinking that
ideological representation is a useful lie
cooked up by the members of the ruling class
to dominate the classes which it subordinates to itself,
as if the members of the ruling class possessed the
truth and were capable of escaping the
deforming effects produced by all ideology.
However, to state this is not to
deny that the ruling class can consciously use
the effects of deformation to strengthen its positions
of domination.

There is no doubt that the deformation of
ideology is dominated, in class society, by the
specific effects of the division of classes, the
role which these classes play in the social structure,
etc. But this fact in no way changes the
general principle, which explains in the last instance,
the necessary deformation of all ideological
representation by the structural character of every society.

## Ideological Structure and Economic Determination

We have seen that the ideological level is
constituted by the joining of representation and
social behavior. According to Marxism, the common thread
that allows us to explain these ideas and
behaviors is the form in which human beings produce
material goods, that is to say, the economic structure of
society. It is not, therefore, ideas that determine
people's behavior, but the way in which people participate
in the production of material goods which determines their
thoughts and actions.

But by saying that the economy determines
human ideas, are we not implying the reduction
of the ideological level to a simple reflection
of the economics?

Marxism does not contend that ideology can
simply be reduced to economics. It asserts,
on the contrary, that the ideological level has
its own content, and its own laws of operation
and development. As we saw above, this level
is constituted by diverse ideological tendencies
(bourgeois, petty-bourgeois, proletarian,
etc.) of which one dominates the rest, and
therefore determines to a certain degree their
forms of existence. On the other hand, the
dominant region (religious, moral, philosophical,
etc.) is not directly determined by the
economy but by the characteristics belonging to
the ideological structure of a given society.
According to the religious or lay traditions of
a given society, the dominant bourgeois ideology
will be transmitted through religious, moral,
or philosophical expressions. The ruling class
always knows to utilize the language that
lets it achieve the greatest communication
with the dominated classes. It gives a
class content to the *ideological material* which
presents itself as tradition -- the habits and
customs of that given society.

The ideological level is not a simple
reflection of the economic level but a reality
which has its own structure and its own laws of
operation and development (pre-existing ideological
material, a dominant tendency with a
form of acting on the subordinate tendencies,
etc.) Economic determination acts on this structure
in its entirety. Therefore, the ideological
product is the result of two kinds of determinations:
one internal to the ideological
structure itself and the other external (juridico-political
and economic). *There is no
such thing as direct, mechanical determination
by the economy, but rather a complex, structural
determination.*

Let us see what Engels has to say in this
respect in a letter to Conrad Schmidt, October
27, 1890:

> As to the realms of ideology, ...religion, philosophy, etc., these have a prehistoric stock, found already in existence and taken over in the historic period, of what we should today call bunk.[^6.engels]

[^6.engels]: [Engels to Conrad Schmidt](In Berlinhttps://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1890/letters/90_10_27.htm)

That is, each new historical period
(marked by a new economic determination) finds
itself faced with material inherited from the
previous historical period, and it is on this
material that the new economic determination
acts.

But it is not only a question of inherited
ideological material, but also, and above all
in the case of ideologies which have come to
acquire an elevated degree of systematization,
along with "tools" or "instrumentation" for all of them, which permits this
material to be developed: libraries, archives,
research projects, educational structure,
etc. The poverty or wealth of a country's
philosophy, for example, does not depend
directly on the country's economic poverty or
richness but on the poverty or richness of the
philosophical material and "instrumentation"
inherited from the earlier period.

Engels says the following about this in
the letter cited above:

> Here economy creates nothing absolutely new, but it determines the way in which the existing material of thought is altered and further developed, and that too for the most part indirectly, for it is the political, legal and moral reflexes which exercise the greatest direct influence upon philosophy.

If we insist on the relative autonomy of
the ideological structures with respect to the
economic structure, it is not only for the desire
to be theoretically precise, but also because
of the *grave political repercussions which ignoring
it can have.*

Many critics of Marxism try to deny the
validity of this theory, asserting that Marx
was incorrect with respect to the working class:
"to the degree that capitalism has been developing,
the working class -- instead of growing
and maturing in class consciousness -- has been turning
more bourgeois, adapting more and more to the
system."

If Marxism were to maintain that class
consciousness or ideology is a simple reflection
of economic conditions, one could doubtlessly
assert that Marx was incorrect. But Marxism
maintains something quite different: economic
conditions create the objective material conditions
(concentrations of great masses of workers
in urban centers, technical division and organization
of labor with the factories, which creates
among the workers habits of cooperation
and discipline, mobility of labor between areas
which permits the discovery of new horizons,
etc.) which serve as the base for reaching
proletarian class consciousness, but these conditions
*do not bring about or create anything
directly*. In order for the proletariat to discover
its true class interests, that is, to come
to acquire proletarian class consciousness,
requires the intervention of extra-economic factors.
It is necessary to put Marxist theory in
the hands of the proletariat, the only instrument
capable of freeing the proletarian ideological
tendency from economistic and reformist
deformations, products of the dominant bourgeois
ideology.

## Summary
In this chapter we have studied the ideological
structure. We have seen what place it
occupies within society, what relations exist
between it and the social classes, what is the
origin of the necessarily deformed and distorted
nature of ideological representations, and,
finally, how economic determination acts on the
ideological structure.

We have seen the following concepts of
the general theory of historical materialism:

- ideological structure
- ideological regions
- ideological tendencies
- practical ideologies,
- theoretical ideologies.

### Questions

1. What is the place of ideology within the social structure?
2. What is the content of the ideological structure?
3. Why do attitudes and behavior form part of the ideological structure?
4. What is the relation of ideology to social classes?
5. Can the proletariat have an independent ideology?
6. In what sense is ideology a structure?
7. What is an ideological region?
8. Can you give an example of a practical ideology and a theoretical ideology?
9. What is an ideological tendency?
10. What is the origin of the necessarily deformed and distorted character of ideology?
11. What does it imply to assert that this character is owed solely to the interest of the ruling class to deceive?
12. Does the degree of maturity and richness of a society's ideology depend on a people's economic wealth?
13. How does economic determination act on ideology?

## Themes for reflection
1. Can science be considered a theoretical ideology?
2. What are the causes of the reformist attitudes of many unions?
3. In what moment of the class struggle does the ideological struggle acquire a preponderant role?
4. What role can religious ideologies play in Latin America?

[^6.1]: In this section we base ourselves entirely
  on the article, "Theory, Theoretical
  Practice and Theoretical Formation and
  the Ideological Struggle", by Louis
  Althusser (in Spanish) in *Casa de las
  Ameaicas* num. 34, Havana, Cuba pp. 19-20.

[^6.2]: In this section we base ourselves on the
  previously cited article by Althusser,
  pp. 20-22. The concept of social classes
  will be thoroughly treated in Chapter 10.
  Meanwhile we shall put forward the definition
  which we give there and which we
  shall study: "Social classes are antagonistic
  social groups in which one group
  appropriates the labor of the other
  because of the different places they
  occupy in the economic structure of a
  given mode of production, places which are
  fundamentally determined by the specific
  forms in which they are related to the
  means of production". As examples of these
  antagonistic classes we give owners and
  slaves; landlords and serfs; and capitalists
  and workers.

[^6.3]:. Based fundamentally on Althusser's article
  "On the Concept of Ideology" in Spanish
  in *Polemica sobre marxismo y humanismo*,
  Siglo XXI, Mexico, 1966, pp. 183-186 and in
  the article by Emilio Ipola "Lost Lenguajes
  del Marxismo en lo que se Refiere al Analysis
  de la Cuota de Ganancia Media Realizado
  por Marx en el libro III de *El
  Capital*" •
