# Social Classes

<!--
## Translator's preface

German intellectual Johann Goethe said "Mathematicians are like Frenchmen: whatever you say to them they translate into their own language and
forthwith it is something completely different."

It turns out Marxists are also like Frenchmen, especially French Marxists
like Althusser who Harnecker builds on.

In this chapter, Harnecker defines what a "class" is inside a mode of
production. I think it is important to think of
this as a definition of an abstract concept inside a formal model that we will happen to use the word "class" for,
and not an all-encompassing description of how
people use the existing term "class".

It is like in math. Mathematicians love to define words. For
example, there is the word "normal". Of course it has a meaning outside
of math, It also has many meanings inside math. If we are talking about
a surface inside of space, it means "perpendicular to", if we are talking
about probability, it means a specific bell-shaped distribution. And there
about 100 other mathematical contexts in which it has yet other definitions.

In each context one is free to redefine the word "normal", scoped
to that context, and everyone understands what you are referring to inside
of that context given the definition you gave to the word. In other words,
everyone plays along, agreeing to give the word the precise meaning you gave it for the purposes of discussion.

That is how I would recommend understanding "class in a mode of production"
as described in this chapter. In previous chapters, Harnecker described a certain abstract
object called "mode of production" (which something like a mathematical object)
and now she is going to describe other abstract objects called "classes" which relate to it. 
--->

## Introduction

Marx died before he was able to write the chapter of
*Capital* dedicated precisely to this topic. Many authors
have tried to reconstruct it, but the methods used have not
always been the best ones. Here we shall cite only one of
them: Dahrendorf, who in his book *Class and Class Conflict
in Industrial Society*, tries to reconstruct the last chapter of
*Capital* in the form of a compendium of quotations from
different texts of Marx, which belonged to different periods
and which are developed at different levels of abstraction.
These are then arranged according to a previously established scheme.
His effort is valuable
as a presentation of quotations, but absolutely worthless
as a contribution to the
understanding of the Marxist "problematic" regarding social
classes.

The correct approach is not to construct the missing
concepts through a compilation of quotations or a selection
of the best of them, but to try to construct them through an
understanding of the problematic on which they are based,
which is found fundamentally in *Capital*. This is the
approach that we have followed.

The concept of social class can be defined at an abstract level:
at the level of mode of production. But if it is to be a
tool of political analysis, it must be made concrete,
studying the new properties it acquires in a concrete social
formation and in a given political conjuncture.

We will first define the concept of social class at the level
of mode of production in order to later move on to the
particular properties it acquires at the levels of
social formation and political conjuncture.

## Social Classes and Mode of Production

In every mode of production in which relations of
exploitation exist, we find two antagonistic social
groups. The exploiters and the exploited: slaves and
masters, serfs and feudal lords, workers and bosses.

The existence of these classes or antagonistic groups
was not discovered by Marx. Many historians and economists
had already spoken of them before him.

Marx wrote to J. Weydemeyer on March 5, 1852:

> ...And now as to myself, no credit is due to me for discovering the existence of classes in modern society or the struggle between them. Long before me bourgeois historians had described the historical development of this class struggle and bourgeois economists, the economic economy of the classes. What I did that was new was to prove: (1) that the *existence of classes* is only bound up with *particular historical phases in the development of production* (historische Entwicklungsphasen der Production), (2) that the class struggle necessarily leads to the dictatorship of the proletariat, (3) that this dictatorship itself only constitutes the transition to the *abolition of all classes and to a classless society*[^9.1]. 

[^9.1]: ["Marx to J. Weydemeyer in New York"](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1852/letters/52_03_05-ab.htm).

Therefore, Marx *did not discover* classes or class struggle. Economists like Smith
and Ricardo, historians like Tierry, Guizot, and Niebuhr, from the beginning of
the 19th century had already addressed this problem.
Marx's point of departure was the point of arrival of those 
economists and historians.

Historical knowledge, in its most advanced form, already in Marx's time
showed the succession of "civilizations", of "political regimes", of cultures, etc.,
to be the result of struggle between social groups: slaves and free citizens,
patricians and plebeians, serfs and feudal landlords, etc.

Therefore, when Marx begins the *Communist Manifesto* with the celebrated
phrase "The history of all hitherto
existing society is the history of class struggles", he is merely
summarizing the conclusions which his predecessors had reached.
These conclusions comprised the raw material on which he
would work theoretically in order to construct a
scientific theory of classes and their struggles.

If we return to the first contribution mentioned by
Marx to Weydemeyer, we can express it as putting into
relation the concept of class with the concept of
mode of production ("historical phases in the development of production").

In one of the texts which is most cited by Marxists,
Lenin defines social classes in the following way:

> Classes are large groups of people differing from each other by the place they occupy in a historically determined system of social production, by their relation (in most cases fixed and formulated in law) to the means of production, by their role in the social organisation of labour, and, consequently, by the dimensions of the share of social wealth of which they dispose and the mode of acquiring it. Classes are groups of people one of which can appropriate the labour of another owing to the different places they occupy in a definite system of social economy.[^9.2]

[^9.2]: Lenin, [*A Great Beginning*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1919/jun/19.htm).

In many other texts, Lenin emphasizes the
relation between one's location in social production or their
relation to the means of production, and one's social class.
The great contribution of Marxism to the study of social
classes has been precisely to establish this relation.

The Marxist definition of social class would therefore be
the following:

> **Social classes** are antagonistic social groups in which one appropriates the labor of the other due to the different location they occupy in the economic structure of a given mode of production. These locations are fundamentally determined by the specific form in which the corresponding classes relate to the means of production.

This specific relation has classically been considered as a
relation of ownership or non-ownership of the means of
production, generally identifying *ownership* with effective
*possession* of them. But we have already seen that both
words are not the same, that ownership does not always
coincide with effective possession. This confusion has its
origin in *Capital* itself, since in the pre-monopolistic
capitalist mode of production studied by Marx both
relations coincide in the same person. The capitalist is the
*owner* of the means of production and *"effectively"
possesses* them at the same time, since without his
intervention or that of his delegate, the complex process of
production cannot proceed. However, in the only
section of *Capital* where Marx refers to pre-capitalist forms
of production, he clearly distinguishes these two relations:
ownership and effective possession.

The correspondence or non-correspondence of these
relations produces different effects on the different groups
involved. Let's look at two types of effects which may be
produced according to the way in which these two relations
are put together.

|Class A|Class B|Effect|
|-------|-------|------|
|Ownership and effective possession of all means of production.|Neither ownership nor effective possession |In order to produce its means of subsistence, class B must work for  class A.|
|Ownership of the most important means of production: the land|Possession of the land, ownership of the instruments of labor, control of the production process, effective possession.|Class B does not need to work for class A in order to produce its means of subsistence. If it does, it will be for extra-economic reasons.|

In the second situation, it is precisely the non-correspondence
between ownership and effective possession which would necessitate
the use of extra-economic factors to establish and maintain the relation
of exploitation.

> It is clear, too, that in all forms where
  the actual worker himself remains the 'possessor' of the means of
  production and the conditions of labour needed for the production
  of his own means of subsistence, the property relationship must
  appear at the same time as a direct relationship of domination and
  servitude, and the direct producer therefore as an unfree person -
  an unfreedom which may undergo a progressive attenuation from
  serfdom with statute-labour down to a mere tribute obligation.
  The direct producer in this case is by our assumption in possession
  of his own means of production, the objective conditions of
  labour needed f or the realization of his labour and the production
  of his means of subsistence; he pursues his agriculture independently,
  as well as the rural-domestic industry associated with it.
  This independence is not abolished when, as in India for example,
  these small peasants form a more or less natural community,
  since what is at issue here is independence vis-a-vis the nominal
  landlord. Under these conditions, the surplus labour for the
  nominal landowner can only be extorted from them by extra-economic compulsion,
  whatever the form this might assume.[^9.3]

[^9.3]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol. 3, p. 926.

The relations of production, therefore, are the most
important element for defining social classes. 
The character of the relationship between the exploiting
class and the exploited class will be defined by the
character of these relations.

The correspondence between legal ownership and real
ownership of the means of production in the capitalist mode
of production, which establishes the complete separation of
the worker from their means of production, is what forces the
worker to "voluntarily" offer their labor power to the capitalist
in order to survive. This theoretically makes the intervention of
extra-economic factors unnecessary to produce these class relations.
That's not to say that these factors are totally absent.
We know that the capitalist relations of production rest on a given
legal conception of property and employment contract and in the
presence of an army ready to act in those moments where the class
struggle becomes particularly intense, as the history of
killings in the workers' movement confirms. To explain this we would
say that although superstructural relations are present in
capitalism, they intervene only when there exists a threat to the
system which tends to spontaneously reproduce itself through the
capitalist economic laws themselves.

Something quite different occurred in the feudal mode of
production. 
Here, the non-correspondence of legal ownership and effective
possession make it so that the owning class (the landlords)
have to resort to force, to tradition, to religion, etc., in
order to successfully reproduce the relations of exploitation,
to keep the serf under their yoke.

In the period of transition from capitalism to socialism,
there is a non-correspondence between ownership and
effective possession of the principal means of production.
The ownership of the principal means of production is
held by the proletarian state (i.e., the proletariat as
the class represented by the state). Effective possession,
however, is still in the hands of those who by their
prior knowledge are able to operate them (ex-capitalists who
have become administrators, the whole gamut of specialists of
the old system, and later the new specialists, still trained
with the old mentality). It is this mismatch which necessitates
the intervention of extra-economic forces: political (this is one of
the reasons for the dictatorship of the proletariat) and ideological,
in order to fight against the habits inherited from the old
system.
These extra-economic factors must intervene to prevent the
labor of workers from being hoarded and accumulated, in one way or another,
by the group that has effective possession of the means
of production.

Only the development of new productive forces (including
the workers and their technical training) will allow the
workers to realize full possession of the means of production,
and thereby the abolition of class itself.

> Clearly, in order to abolish classes completely, it is not enough to overthrow the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists, not enough to abolish their rights of ownership; it is necessary also to abolish all private ownership of the means of production, it is necessary to abolish the distinction between town and country, as well as the distinction between manual workers and brain workers. This requires a very long period of time. In order to achieve this an enormous step forward must be taken in developing the productive forces; it is necessary to overcome the resistance (frequently passive, which is particularly stubborn and particularly difficult to overcome) of the numerous survivals of small-scale production; it is necessary to overcome the enormous force of habit and conservatism which are connected with these survivals.[^9.4]

[^9.4]: Lenin, op. cit.

## The Capitalist Mode of Production: Two or Three Classes?

In the previous section it was stated that only two
antagonistic classes exist in every mode of production.
How do we explain, then, that Marx, in referring to
capitalism in the Preface to *A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy* and in various chapters of Capital speaks of three
classes: capitalists, landowners, and workers?

To be able to respond to this question we must ask
ourselves: at what level of abstraction was Marx working
when he spoke of these three classes? At the abstract level
of the pure capitalist mode of production or at the more
concrete level of a social formation dominated by
capitalism?

If we rigorously study the texts, we realize that when
Marx speaks of the "three classes" he always refers to
"modern society," to "modern bourgeois society," or to
"modern society based on the capitalist regime," and not to
the capitalist mode of production.

On the other hand, if we carefully examine the chapters on
ground rent which are found in part 6 of *Capital* (Vol. III) and
especially chapter 37: "Introduction," we see that
Marx studied the problem of rent because "the monopoly of landed property is a historical
precondition for the capitalist mode of production and remains
its permanent foundation, as with all previous modes of production
based on the exploitation of the masses in one form or the other."
Therefore Marx was obligated to study rent because it
constitutes a fundamental historical fact in the
constitution of the capitalist mode of production and not
because of some abstract logical necessity.

Lenin tells us that "logically we can quite easily imagine a
purely capitalist organization of agriculture in which private
property in land is entirely absent" and therefore without
landlords.<!-- [!^9.izzy.1] -->

<!--
[^9.izzy.1]: It seems to me that Harnecker (and Lenin) are leaving out something important here. Marx's 
  quote is in full "the monopoly of landed property is a historical
  precondition for the capitalist mode of production and remains
  its permanent foundation, as with all previous modes of production
  based on the exploitation of the masses in one form or the other."
  He is saying that *every* class society needs there to be a monopoly on land.
  Why? One reason is that otherwise people can simply opt-out of exploitation by going to some
  land which is not owned by the exploiters. *The Dawn of Everything* by Graeber and Wengrow
  gives historical examples of this dynamic at work in societies with less pronounced class
  structures. In precise language, landowners are not part of the definition of capitalist relations of production, but a separation of workers from land ownership is a logically necessary part of any social formation in which capitalist relations of production predominate, and a landowning class is one way to accomplish this.
  -->

Let us now look at the most explicit texts of Marx about the *problem of
the three classes*:

> Assuming the capitalist mode of production, then the capitalist is not only a necessary functionary, but the dominating functionary in production.  The landowner, on the other hand, is quite superfluous in this mode of production.  Its only requirement is that land should not be common property, that it should confront the working class as a condition of production, not belonging to it, and the purpose is completely fulfilled if it becomes state-property, i.e., if the state draws the rent.  The landowner, such an important functionary in production in the ancient world and in the Middle Ages, is a useless superfetation in the industrial world.  The radical bourgeois (with an eye moreover to the suppression of all other taxes) therefore goes forward theoretically to a refutation of the private ownership of the land, which, in the form of state property, he would like to turn into the common property of the bourgeois class, of capital.  But in practice he lacks the courage, since an attack on one form of property—a form of the private ownership of a condition of labour—might cast considerable doubts on the other form.  Besides, the bourgeois has himself become an owner of land.[^9.6]

[^9.6]: Karl Marx, [*Theories of Surplus Value*, chapter 8](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1863/theories-surplus-value/ch08.htm).

This other quotation is even more clear.

> Capitalist production is based on the antithesis of two factors, materialised labour and living labour.  Capitalist and wage-labourer are the sole functionaries and factors of production whose relationship and confrontation arise from the nature of the capitalist mode of production.
> 
> The circumstances under which the capitalist has in turn to share a part of the surplus-labour or surplus-value which he has captured, with a third, non-working person, are only of secondary importance.  It is also a fact of production, that, after the part of the value which is equal to constant capital is deducted, the entire surplus-value passes straight from the hands of the worker to those of the capitalist, with the exception of that part of the value of the product which is paid out as wages.  The capitalist confronts the worker as the direct owner of the entire surplus-value, in whatever manner he may later be sharing it with the money-lending capitalist, landowner etc.  As James Mill observes, production could therefore continue undisturbed if the landed proprietor disappeared and the state took his place.  He -- the private landowner -- is not a necessary agent for capitalist production, although it does require that the land should belong to someone, so long as it is not the worker, but for instance, the state.  Far from being an error on the part of Ricardo etc., this reduction of the classes participating directly in production, hence also in the value produced and then in the products in which this value is embodied, to capitalists and wage-labourers, and the exclusion of the landowners (who only enter post festum, as a result of conditions of ownership of natural forces that have not grown out of the capitalist node of production but have been passed on to it) is rooted in the nature of the capitalist mode of production -- as distinct from the feudal, ancient etc.  This reduction is an adequate theoretical expression of the capitalist mode of production[^9.7]

[^9.7]: Ibid., [chapter 9](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1863/theories-surplus-value/ch09.htm).

These texts allow us therefore to conclude that in the capitalist
mode of production, as in every mode of production, there are
only two fundamental antagonistic classes: the bourgeoisie
and the proletariat. When Marx speaks of three classes, he is referring
not to a pure mode of production but to a given social formation:
modern English society or another dominated by the capitalist
mode of production.

## Social Classes and the Reproduction of the Mode of Production

In order to be able to satisfy the consumption needs of the
people who live in a society, the process of production of
material goods cannot grind to a halt, nor can it be
interrupted: it has to reproduce itself continuously. And
this process tends to reproduce itself according to its
mode of production and without breaking up the social
relations of production which its functioning presupposes.
For this reason, it is important to bring 
the concept of "reproduction of a mode production" into the
definition of classes.

Let's see what Marx says in reference to the capitalist
mode of production:

> Capitalist production therefore reproduces in the course of its
> own process the separation between labour-power and the conditions of labour.
> It thereby reproduces and perpetuates the conditions under which the worker is exploited.
> It incessantly forces him
> to sell his labour-power in order to live, and enables the capitalist to
> purchase labour-power in order that he may enrich himself. It is
> no longer a mere accident that capitalist and worker confront each
> other in the market as buyer and seller. It is the alternating rhythm
> of the process itself which throws the worker back onto the market
> again and again as a seller of his labour-power and continually
> transforms his own product into a means by which another man
> can purchase him. In reality, the worker belongs to capital before
> he has sold himself to the capitalist. His economic bondage is
> at once mediated through, and concealed by, the periodic
> renewal of the act by which he sells himself, his change of masters,
> and the oscillations in the market-price of his labour.
> 
> The capitalist process of production, therefore, seen as a total,
> connected process, i.e. a process of reproduction, produces not
> only commodities, not only surplus-value, but it also produces and
> reproduces the capital-relation itself; on the one hand the capitalist,
> on the other the wage-labourer.[^9.8]

[^9.8]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol I, pp. 723-724.

But it is not enough to see the importance of reproduction
in the establishment of classes; it is necessary to study the
specific form which this process of reproduction assumes
according to the mode of production.

The reproduction of the capitalist mode of production,
for example, not only implies the reproduction of its two
social classes -- capitalists and workers -- but also their
reproduction according to a certain tendency: the
numerical strengthening of the working class by the growing
proletarianization of those capitalists unable to beat
the competition, and, therefore, the shrinking
of the capitalist class.

The study of the class of petty agricultural producers as a transitional class from
pre-capitalist forms to capitalist forms shows us that, on the
contrary, its tendency of development involves a drop in the
number of peasants, some of whom come to form a part of
the capitalist system of production.

It is this dynamic aspect of the functioning of classes,
essential to Marxist theory, which many of its followers have
forgotten, transforming the study of classes into a formalistic,
static study.

## Social Group, Class and Class Fraction

<!--
::: warning

Many of the claims in this section are both controversial and
easy to misinterpret. We will add lots of footnotes to
point out things we think are controversial or to add our own
understandings.

Class is both a scientific concept within Marxist sociology
as well as a political concept which can be used to create
a political identity capable of motivating people to action.
This section is dealing with the former (although there is of
course a political impact of claiming such a definition).
In political or rhetorical contexts,
different senses of class are used that differ from the one laid
out here.

:::

-->

In the previous pages we have stated that there are only
two antagonistic classes in every mode of production. We
have shown, for example, that the landholding class is not,
in the strict Marxist sense, a class of the capitalist mode of
production.

When we say that in every mode of reproduction there are
only two antagonistic classes do we mean that all the
individuals living under a given mode of production must
be part of one of the two antagonistic classes?<!-- [^9.izzy.two] -->
Not at all.
Not all the individuals of a society, nor even all the social
groups, belong to a definite class.

Among all the social groups that exist in a society, only
the groups that directly participate in the production
process, forming antagonistic poles (exploiters and
exploited) constitute social classes.<!-- [^9.izzy.2] -->
There are other groups
which cannot be defined as social classes, either because at
the level of production they represent intermediary groups
between the two antagonistic classes -- as is the case with
specialists and administrators -- or because they are not
directly linked to production since they serve the institutions
of the superstructure: professors, lawyers, functionaries of
the state apparatus, etc.

<!--
[^9.izzy.two]: Translator: To us, the restriction to exactly two, even for
  the definition of an abstract object, seems unnecessary. It is possible
  to conceive of abstract systems of surplus extraction which
  involve three groups, for example one could imagine a system of groups
  $A$, $B$ and $C$, in which $A$ exploits $B$, $B$ exploits $C$, and
  $C$ does not exploit anyone. I would guess this is an intellectual artifact
  of the idea that "dialectics" should refer only to dyads of opposing
  forces, and not more complex arrangements of more than two opposing forces.

[^9.izzy.2]: Translator: To be clear, those who "directly participate in the production
  process" must be understood in a broad sense to correctly understand
  what the working class is. This includes both those who work for a wage
  in capitalist firms and those who perform unwaged work like
  domestic labor, which is necessary to produce the labor power used in all
  productive processes. I think this should also include the unemployed (Marx's "reserve
  army of labor") but here we may run up against limits of the
  definition as given. 
  The presence of the unemployed helps drive down the price of labor-power,
  which plays a role in the process of producing labor-power, although I'm
  not sure whether this fits with the definition as given here.
  Another wrinkle is the fact that an individual's
  role in production may change over their lifetime (they may even perform different
  roles at different times of the day)
  and so membership of an individual in a class is a time-dependent or
  multi-valued property, rather than something binary.
-->

On the other hand one must not confuse the concept of
class with the concept of class fraction, which refers to
the subgroups into which a class can be broken down. For
example, the bourgeoisie as a class breaks down into the
industrial bourgeoisie, the commercial bourgeoisie, and the
financial bourgeoisie. What matters is to determine the
scientific criterion which enables us to distinguish the
different fractions within a given class.

In *Capital*, Marx points the way toward how one can divide the
classes of the capitalist mode of production into fractions.

Marx goes from the abstract
concept of surplus value to the more concrete concepts of
industrial profit, commercial profit, and interest -- which are
nothing but the developed forms of surplus value -- that is,
the forms in which it appears on a more concrete level of analysis of capital.
In the same way,
we should pass from the two classes of the
capitalist mode of production, considered at the level of the
production process of surplus value -- capitalists and
workers -- to the class fractions which arise in the circulation
process of capital.

Actually, Marx follows this process when he analyzes the
developed forms of surplus value: to industrial profit
corresponds the industrial bourgeoisie; to commercial
profit, the commercial bourgeoisie; and to interest, the
financial bourgeoisie.

Does the same thing occur with the analysis of the
proletariat?

Marx is less explicit on this point. This has led many
Marxist theorists to exclude from the concept of the
proletariat people who work in banks and commercial
establishments, who are then considered as "employees" (a
social group which would be embraced by the ambiguous
concept of the "middle classes").

What is the basic argument of these Marxist theorists?
According to them, a person can be considered a worker
only if they *directly* produce surplus value, that is, a
"productive" worker. Let us compare Marx's analysis to this
argument. Why does he consider 
the representatives of commercial financial capital
as fractions of the bourgeoisie *if they
do not participate directly* in the extraction of
surplus value but only in its realization (that is, in the sale of
products and the financial operations which enable the
industrial capitalist to recoup the capital invested
in the production process in the form of money)?

Following this, one would think that in the same way that there
exists a "non-productive" bourgeoisie -- that is, not directly
connected to the production of surplus value -- there would
exist a "non-productive" proletariat corresponding to this
fraction of the bourgeoisie. Let's see what Marx says about
the commercial wage-earner.

> The question now arises as to the position of the commercial
> wage-labourers employed by the merchant capitalist...From one point of view,
> a commercial employee of this kind is
> a wage-labourer like any other. Firstly, in so far as his labour is
> bought with the merchant's variable capital, not with money that
> he spends as revenue; it is bought, in other words, not for a
> personal service but for the purpose of valorizing the capital advanced
> in it. Secondly, in so far as the value of his labour-power, and
> therefore his wage, is determined, like that of all other wage-labourers,
> by the production and reproduction costs of this
> particular labour-power and not by the product of his labour.
>
> But there is necessarily the same difference between him and the
> workers directly employed by industrial capital as there is between
> industrial capital and commercial capital, and consequently
> between the industrial capitalist and the merchant. Since the
> merchant, being simply an agent of circulation, produces neither
> value nor surplus-value (for the additional value that he adds to
> commodities by his expenses is reducible to the addition of
> previously existing value, even though the question still arises here
> as to how he maintains and conserves the value of this constant
> capital), the commercial workers whom he employs in these same
> functions cannot possibly create surplus-value for him directly.[^9.9]

[^9.9]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol. III, pp. 406-407.

Finally, let's see what is the dynamic of development of this
fraction of the proletariat
as the capitalist mode of
production reproduces itself in expanded form:

> The commercial worker proper belongs to the better-paid
> class of wage-labourer; he is one of those whose labour is
> skilled labour, above-average labour. His wage, however, has a
> tendency to fall, as the capitalist mode of production advances,
> even in relation to average labour. Firstly, because the division of
> labour within the commercial office means that only a one-sided
> development of ability need be produced and that much of the
> cost of producing this ability to work is free for the capitalist,
> since the worker's skill is rather developed by the function itself,
> and indeed is developed all the more quickly, the more one-sided
> the function becomes with the division of labour. Secondly,...The
> general extension of
> popular education permits this variety of labour to be recruited
> from classes which were formerly excluded from it and were
> accustomed to a lower standard of living. This also increases
> supply, and with it competition...
> The capitalist increases the number of these
> workers, if he has more value and profit to realize. The increase
> in this labour is always an effect of the increase in surplus-value,
> and never a cause of it.[^9.10]

[^9.10]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol. III, pp. 414-415.

To accept our earlier approach implies questioning
the theoretical usefulness which some Marxists have given
to the concept of productive labor in the definition of
social classes. If we use this concept in the sense that
Marx uses it in some analyses, we reach the absurd conclusion
that everyone from the unskilled worker to the manager of a factory
would be included in the concept of the industrial proletariat.
That is, from direct workers who are
exploited in the flesh to those indirect workers who are
nothing more than representatives of the capitalist in the
process of extracting surplus value.

Nonetheless, even if the concept of productive labor is not
adequate to define the two antagonistic classes in the
capitalist mode of production, it is useful, at the political
level, to determine the class and the class fraction capable of
carrying out and directing a socialist revolution. It is the
productive proletariat, the proletariat, characteristic of
advanced capitalism, which, because of its situation in
production (the very organization of complex, collective
labor, level of education, etc.), is the fraction of the
proletariat best prepared to direct a socialist revolution,
which is the vanguard of the proletariat<!--[^9.izzy.3] -->.

<!--
[^9.izzy.3]: Harnecker is mixing a lot of concepts here and
  the overall claim is politically dubious.
  Historically speaking, it is often factors not directly perceptible
  through these economic categories which provide both the spark of revolution
  and the social cohesion necessary for a group to carry it through.
  For example, the Women's Day march in Petrograd in 1917 kicked off the February
  Revolution.
  Also, productive workers do not necessarily participate in
  complex collective labor. There are always labor processes which
  have been formally subsumed into capitalism but not really subsumed,
  and so have not been developed into complex social forms.
-->
## Class Interest

Before moving to a more concrete level of analysis -- the
level of the historically given social formation -- and
studying, at this level, the new properties which the
concept of social class acquires there, we shall examine two
concepts frequently used but very rarely defined: the concept of
class interest and of class consciousness.

Is class interest the collection of the spontaneous aspirations
of a given social class? Can a strike which is limited to
expressing immediate grievances, without calling into
question the capitalist system, be considered the expression
of the class interest of the proletariat?

To answer these questions we must first distinguish
between two kinds of interests: immediate, spontaneous
interests, and long-term strategic interests.

*Immediate, spontaneous interests* are the aspirations
which classes or social groups have motivated by the
current problems of their existence. Their objective
is generally attaining an immediate improvement in well-being, a
larger share in the distribution of social wealth. For
example: the immediate, spontaneous interest of a group of
low-salaried workers is to get an increase in pay to
compensate for a rise in the cost of living. The
immediate interest of a group of peasants is that their
products be bought at a suitable price. In both cases one
tries to ameliorate a current ill, without seeking its
deeper source. It is important to
keep in mind that these immediate, spontaneous interests
are always influenced by the ruling ideology. It is for
this reason that they never reach the point of calling
into question the system itself.

Thus the proletariat, left to its own immediate,
spontaneous interests would not succeed in going beyond a purely
reformist struggle: struggles for better salaries, a better
family allowance[^9.translation.1],
more time off, etc., aspirations with which there is
nothing wrong, but which cannot become the final goal of
the class struggle of the proletariat since they do not call
into question the system of exploitation itself.

[^9.translation.1]: Translator: In Chile, *asignación familiar* ("family allowance") refers
  to a government subsidy given to families depending on how many 
  dependents they have.

> The history of all countries shows that the working class, exclusively by its own effort, is able to develop only trade union consciousness, i.e., the conviction that it is necessary to combine in unions, fight the employers, and strive to compel the government to pass necessary labour legislation, etc.[^9.11]

[^9.11]: Lenin, [*What Is To Be Done?*, ch. 2](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1901/witbd/ii.htm).

Therefore:

> all worship of the spontaneity of the working class movement, all belittling of the role of “the conscious element”, of the role of Social-Democracy, *means, quite independently of whether he who belittles that role desires it or not, a strengthening of the influence of bourgeois ideology upon the workers.*[^9.12]

[^9.12]: Ibid.

As a result, the immediate, spontaneous interests cannot be
considered, in the strict sense, class interests.

What, then, is meant by class interests? 

Let's look at what Marx says in *The Holy Family*:

> It is not a question of what this or that proletarian, or even the whole proletariat, at the moment *regards* as its aim. It is a question of *what the proletariat is*, and what, in accordance with this *being*, it will historically be compelled to do. Its aim and historical action is visibly and irrevocably foreshadowed in its own life situation as well as in the whole organization of bourgeois society today.[^9.holy]

[^9.holy]: Marx and Engels, [*The Holy Family*, ch. 4](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845/holy-family/ch04.htm).

Therefore, the long-term, strategic interests are the
interests which arise from the very location of each class within
the economic structure of the society.

The long-term, strategic interest of the ruling [*dominante*] class is
to perpetuate its domination, that of the dominated class is
to destroy the system of domination. The strategic interest
of the proletariat, for example, is to destroy the capitalist
system of production, the root cause of its exploited condition,
destroying its foundation: the private ownership of the
means of production.

It is important to point out that, owing to the distorting
influence of the ruling ideology, consciousness of these long-term,
strategic interests cannot arise in a spontaneous way;
it is necessary that the members of the exploited classes learn
to recognize them. The necessity of spreading
Marxist theory throughout the workers' movement stems,
precisely, from the inability of the proletariat to immediately recognize
its long-term, strategic interests.

> Social-Democracy[^9.socdem] is the combination of the working-class movement and socialism. Its task is not to serve the working-class movement passively at each of its separate stages, but to represent the interests of the movement as a whole, to point out to this movement its ultimate aim and its political tasks, and to safeguard its political and ideological independence. Isolated from Social-Democracy, the working-class movement becomes petty and inevitably becomes bourgeois.[^9.13]

[^9.socdem]: Translator: At this time, "social democracy" was the general name of the mainstream current of Marxist socialism, rather than the name of a type of welfarist capitalism.

[^9.13]: Lenin, [*The Urgent Tasks of Our Movement*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1900/nov/tasks.htm).

There may be contradictions
between the immediate, spontaneous interests and the
strategic, long-term interests which reflect the dialectical
duality of the short range objective and the ultimate objective.
For example, the attainment of
high salaries, if not accompanied by correct ideological
education, can serve to lull the proletariat to sleep, draining it
of its energy to struggle for its long-term, strategic
interests -- that is, the struggle for the destruction of the
capitalist system and the establishment of the socialist
system. The ruling classes are very good at cleverly using these
contradictions to perpetuate their rule.

We can conclude from the above that in the rigorous
sense, only the long-term, strategic interests represent true
*class interests*.

On the other hand, it is only by beginning with
immediate interests that we can eventually get the
proletariat to understand its true class interests.

Lenin was very clear and precise on this point. Leading
the proletariat in the political struggle against the
servants of capital,

> requires that the struggle be bound up with definite everyday interests...But if these separate interests are obscured by bare political demands that only the intelligentsia understand, will this not mean again turning back, again confining everything to the struggle of the intelligentsia alone, whose impotence has only just been admitted?[^9.14]

[^9.14]: Lenin, [*What the “Friends of the People” Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1894/friends/append03.htm#v01zz99h-326-GUESS). 

Therefore, it is necessary to combat two errors:

1. Thinking of the immediate, spontaneous aspirations of a class
  as *class interest*.
2. Forgetting that *it is necessary to
  begin with the immediate interests* of a class to lead it to
  understand its true class interests.

## Class Consciousness and Class Instinct

The other term that we should define is *class
consciousness*.

Class consciousness should not be confused with the
psychological consciousness of the individuals who
comprise part of a given class. It is neither the sum nor the
average of what the individuals of a given class think, feel,
etc., at a given moment.

Class consciousness is directly linked to the concept of
class interest.

An individual or a social group has class consciousness
when it is conscious of its true class interests.

Class consciousness, therefore, is an objective piece of information
related to an objective situation: the place which each class occupies in
social production. This distinguishes it absolutely from
empirical notions, from the psychologically recognizable
and explainable notions which people construct from their
life situation.

Given all this, we should ask ourselves one last question:
Is class consciousness something that happens spontaneously?

To respond to this question, we should distinguish first
*class consciousness* and *class instinct*.

Every social class, owing to its objective location within
social production, tends to react in a characteristic manner. *Class
instinct* is precisely those unconscious schemas which generate those reactions,
products of the class's location, which underlie all
spontaneous expressions of class.
Class instinct is subjective and spontaneous, class
consciousness objective and rational.

It is Lenin who most frequently employs the term class
instinct.

> The peasantry has proletarian "instinct"... The workers
  instinctively aspire to socialism... it is the instinct of the
  exploited which brings them to fraternize at the front..., etc.

Now then, is there a direct path from instinct to consciousness?
Clearly not, at least in reference to the exploited classes of
any mode of production.

The ruling ideology inserts itself between instinct
and consciousness, distorting instinct and limiting it to
those actions in the world which do not call the system into
question, and for this reason proletarian class
consciousness *is never* the mere expression of its location in
the economic structure of society.

If the proletariat of a given country does not have class
consciousness, but merely a consciousness limited to the protesting of grievances,
this cannot be blamed exclusively on the lack of
ripeness of the objective conditions. Conditions will
never be sufficiently ripe for the proletariat to acquire
by itself its class consciousness. The task of the workers'
party consists precisely in "introducing" class consciousness
into the proletariat, that is, in demonstrating it and by helping the
class to be consistent with its true class interests.

## Social Classes and Social Formation[^9.joubert]

***Class structure*** is the assemblage or structured combination of
the different classes and class fractions at different levels (economic,
political, ideological)
relationship of the different classes
and class fractions at different levels (economic, political,
ideological) of a social formation. I.e., the data of how these classes
and class fractions all fit together at different levels.
This class structure does is not a simple
juxtaposition of the typical classes of each of the sets of relations of
production which are found in a social formation, but an
original combination of these classes which are
thus the subjects of long-term strategies.

[^9.joubert]: This section is fundamentally based on an unpublished text of Joubert.

<!--
[^9.translation.2]: Translator: The imperfect translation "trade unionist" for *reivindicativo* is
  taken from the original Monthly Review translation. What is meant here is
  a consciousness limited to the addressing of grievances.
  -->

In this assemblage of a certain number of
classes in a given social formation, we always find one
ruling class or class fraction and the ruled classes or class
fractions.

A class structure at the level of the social formation establishes
certain facts due only to the combination of the different sets of relations
of production (which support the different antagonistic classes)
from each mode of production which the class structure contains.
In addition to these though, the class structure implies other facts
which explain the rise of new, temporary or "transitional" classes. 
For example, there is a class of petty agricultural producers which rises 
with the suppression of the regime of production based
on serfdom and which tends to disappear through the
development of capitalism in the countryside, turning
the majority them into an agricultural proletariat or 
leading them to emigrate to cities.

Therefore, in order to make a thorough analysis of the
class structure of a given social formation, we must consider
the transitional classes
in addition to the classes typical of the current relations of
production. At the same time we
should not forget that each of these classes undergoes
modifications due to how it is connected to the others, and
by playing a dominant or subordinate role in this
connection.

Let's apply what has been said to a social formation
dominated by capitalism, that is, a social formation in which
the capitalist system of production dominates at the level of
the production of material goods, subordinating in one way
or another the co-existing modes of production of
material goods as well as serving as the base of a political
and ideological structure.

The ruling class in the capitalist mode of production
becomes the class which dominates in the social formation.
It sees to it that its class interests prevail over the interests of
all the other classes. The very nature of dominance
produces new facts which are absent at the
level of the pure mode of production. This ruling class will, in effect,
have to maintain relations of exploitation,
collaboration, political struggle, etc., not only with the
proletariat but also with the other classes of the social
formation. This implies that it must have, in the very heart of
the class structure, new instruments (economic, political,
and ideological) which enable it to secure and perpetuate its
domination.

In a social formation dominated by capitalism, the ruling
capitalist class must: 

- reproduce the original relation of
  exploitation (capitalist/proletariat)
- extend this domination
  to other classes or strata of the class structure (capitalist/petty producer)
- prevent all interference by or make
  alliances with the old dominant class (landlords/capitalists).

It is this set of relations which enable it to reproduce
itself as a ruling class and carry out its domination. Let's
see how these relations manifest in the three levels
of the social formation.

At the *economic level*, the artisan, for example, tends
to disappear as an effect of the market economy
and the development of the productive forces within
capitalist enterprises, having afforded the capitalist a previous superexploitation.
The peasantry, except for a few
exceptions, tends to be transformed into an agricultural
proletariat or to emigrate to the city since their petty
exploitation is no longer profitable compared to large scale
capitalist exploitation, etc.

On the *political level*, the need arises for a political
intervention in order to reproduce the conditions of
exploitation, something which formally, at the level of pure
mode of production, did not appear to be necessary.

The bourgeoisie, while rising but before triumphing over all,
still need and use the *power of the
state* to "regulate" wages. That is, to force them within the
limits suitable for surplus value creation, to lengthen the
working day and to keep the workers themselves at the normal
level of subordination[^9.15].

[^9.15]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol. I, p. 382

On the other hand, the domination of one class in the class
structure does not always imply that this same class
dominates politically. Sometimes shifts happen.
A class which, by its situation in the economic
structure, dominates in the class structure of a given
social formation, can abandon political power to another
class to conserve its domination in the economic structure,
which in turn establishes its domination in the social
structure.

Marx analyzes this phenomenon in *The Eighteenth Brumaire of
Louis Napoleon*.

> Thus by now stigmatizing as "socialistic" what it had previously extolled as "liberal," the bourgeoisie confesses that its own interests dictate that it should be delivered from the danger of its own rule; that to restore tranquillity in the country its bourgeois parliament must, first of all, be given its quietus; that to preserve its social power intact its political power must be broken; that the individual bourgeois can continue to exploit the other classes and to enjoy undisturbed property, family, religion, and order only on condition that their class be condemned along with the other classes to like political nullity; that in order to save its purse it must forfeit the crown...[^9.16]

[^9.16]: Karl Marx, [*The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon*, ch. 4](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1852/18th-brumaire/ch04.htm).

Finally, on the *ideological level*, the ideology of the ruling
class tends to defend the social order which is nothing more
than the order which it has established to reproduce its
rule. It is not uncommon to observe throughout history that
ideas which had been rejected by the bourgeoisie in a given
era -- like birth control -- are accepted and promulgated
years later, to avoid the population explosion which, by
increasing the number of people dissatisfied with the regime
might even get to the point of endangering it.

## Transitional Classes

***Transitional classes*** are classes which only appear
at the level of the social formation, as the effect of the
breaking down of old relations of production. They tend
to decompose as the new relations of production develop.

The petty bourgeoisie, that is, the independent, petty
producer (artisan or peasant) is a typical example of a
transitional class.

First, let us look at the agrarian petty bourgeoisie or the
*peasantry* in the strict sense.

In places where a regime of production based on
serfdom existed historically, the abolition of
the bonds of serfdom liberated the old serfs,
turning them into more or less independent petty producers.
But the disappearance of serfdom is not due to chance or to
the good will of the "lords", but due to the pressure
exerted by an incipient capitalism, which after a certain degree of
development in the city begins to penetrate the countryside.

The penetration of capitalism into the countryside produces
a disintegrating effect on this class, which little by little
goes on decomposing into a rural proletariat and a rural
bourgeoisie. *The peasantry* as a class tends, therefore, to
disappear. Unable to compete with capitalist production in
the market due to its higher costs of production, it goes to ruin
and either turns into a rural proletariat or emigrates to the
city, except for a few rare cases who manage to hold on
and turn into rich peasants, passing into the ranks of the
rural bourgeoisie.

This decomposition of the peasantry is an irreversible process
as long as the capitalist laws of production dominate. No "wish"
to maintain petty production can halt this process, although
measures can be taken to slow it down.

The same thing happens to the independent petty producers. That is,
the producers who are are simultaneously the owners of their means of
production. The impossibility of competing with capitalist firms
in the market reduces them, bit by bit, to the proletarian condition.

Therefore, the petty bourgeoisie (petty peasant producers and
artisans who produce under an mercantile economic regime) does
not exist as a class at the level of the pure mode of production,
but only appears as such at the level of the social formation,
as a transitional class which arises from the disintegration of
the relations of production based on serfdom and tends to
disappear as capitalist relations of production spread.

The isolation of its members, owing to the independent
form of their production, their transitional character, and
their intermediate character
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie determine their
characteristics and the different levels of the social
formation.

From the economic point of view, the petty bourgeoisie is
an exploited class, subordinated to the dominant capitalist
system. But precisely due to its isolation -- caused by
its very conditions of production, attached to one place and to a
single instance of exploitation -- it is not in a condition
to understand the class character of the exploitation and
oppression which it suffers, at times, no less than the
proletariat. Nor is it in a condition to understand
that the state in bourgeois society cannot help but be
a class state[^9.17].

[^9.17]: Lenin, [*What the “Friends of the People” Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1894/friends/append03.htm#v01zz99h-326-GUESS).

From an ideological point of view, because of their
transitional nature, the petty producer has a dual situation;
On the one hand, they are a progressive element insofar
as they represent liberation from the prior regime of
dependency. On the other hand, they are a reactionary element
insofar as they struggle to maintain their place as an
independent petty producer, putting obstacles in the way
of economic development.

The intermediate location a petty producer occupies, between
the bosses and the workers, leads them to fluctuate between the
interests of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.

Moreover, this class is the most susceptible to the ruling
ideology, with which it establishes relations that prevent
it from perceiving the objective conditions of its servitude
and future destruction.

To close, we quote this excellent passage from Lukacs
about the petty bourgeoisie:

> This class lives at least in part in the
capitalist big city and every aspect of its existence is directly exposed
to the influence of capitalism. Hence it cannot possibly remain
wholly unaffected by the *fact* of class conflict between bourgeoisie
and proletariat. But as a "transitional class in which the interests of
two other classes become simultaneously blunted..." it will imagine
itself "to be above all class antagonisms”. Accordingly it will
search for ways whereby it will "not indeed eliminate the two
extremes of capital and wage labour, but will weaken their
antagonism and transform it into harmony". In all decisions
crucial for society its actions will be irrelevant and it will
be forced to fight for both sides in turn but always without 
consciousness.[^9.18]

[^9.18]: Georg Lukács, [*History and Class Consciousness*](https://www.marxists.org/ebooks/lukacs/history_and_class_consciousness_georg_lukacs.pdf), p. 70.

## Class Location

In the previous pages we have examined the concept of
social class at two different levels: at the level of the mode of
production and at the level of the social formation, that is, of
a historically given society.

On both levels the classes are defined by their *location*
in the social structure, a location which depends on the
specific relations which the social groups maintain with the
means of production.

Class location is, therefore, determined by the place
which individuals occupy in the process of social
production. We call *class location* the location
which individuals have in the social structure, which is
determined in the last instance by the role they play in
the process of social production.

This concept should not be confused with the concept of
*class origin*, which does not refer to the current location
of the individual in the social structure, but to the class
location in which this individual was formed; for example,
the class location of their parents.

Finally, this concept of *class location* should not be
confused with *class position*, which we develop in
the following section.

## Social Classes and the Political Conjuncture

Our first phase was to define classes at the level of
mode of production. Later we defined them at the level of
social formation. Now, we must move onto the most concrete
level: the level of the "political conjuncture" or "present moment",
which constitutes the synthesis of all the contradictions of
a given society in a given moment of its development.
At this level, new factors come into play, overdetermining
the classes defined above.

We will analyze two of these factors: the problem of ***class position***
and the difference between a class and a ***social force***.

### Class position
When we studied the social classes at
the level of mode of production, we saw that not all individuals
in a society belong to one of the two antagonistic classes. There
exist social groups that cannot be defined as social classes
either because they represent intermediate groups between the
antagonistic classes at the level of production, or because
they do not participate directly in production, being in the
service of superstructural institutions. These groups do not
constitute classes as such, but tend to adopt positions which
favor one or the other of the antagonistic classes.

On the other hand, not all the members of a class will defend the
interests of their class in a given political conjuncture. For
example, the labor aristocracy -- the privileged sector of
the working class of the imperialist capitalist countries --
have in many political conjunctures not defended the interests of
the working class, but instead the interests of the bourgeoisie.

Therefore, just being a member of a class -- having a given class
location -- is not enough to adopt political attitudes consistent
with that class location.

We call ***class position*** the "taking of sides" by a class in
a given political conjuncture.

This "taking of sides" by a given class implies defending
and struggling for the other's class interests; adopting
its point of view, joining its ranks, representing its
interests.

For example, in reference to the "middle strata[^9.mh.147],
the petty industrialist," the petty merchant, the artisan,
the peasant, Marx affirms that "If by chance, they are revolutionary, they are only so in
view of their impending transfer into the proletariat; they thus defend not their present, but their
future interests, they desert their own standpoint to place themselves at that of the proletariat."[^9.commman]

[^9.mh.147]: The term "middle strata" is descriptive. The scientific
  term used by Marx which encompasses these groups is "petty bourgeoisie".
[^9.commman]: Marx and Engels, [*Manifesto of the Communist Party*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/ch01.htm#007).

Furthermore, Lenin says it is not impossible under
certain conditions for this or that stratum of workers to
place itself on the side of the proletariat. Later, he
points out that the whole problem resides in determining
these conditions, and he holds that the words "making the
point of view of the proletariat their own" express these
conditions in a precise form: that these words draw a clear
line demarcating true Marxists from other groups who
claim to be socialists.

In another text, in reference to intellectuals, Lenin says
that despite working toward an objective analysis of reality,
they
"can [not] help taking the side of one class or another (once he has understood their interrelationships)"[^9.mh.150]

[^9.mh.150]: Lenin, [*The Heritage We Renounce*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1897/dec/31c.htm)

In a text on "The Tasks of the Revolutionary Youth", 
Lenin makes clear how students cannot be considered as
a homogeneous mass, since they tend to reflect the interests
of all classes and political groups in society.
Only some among them "adopt a revolutionary position,"
dedicating their strength to the working class.

In the *Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon*, Marx
speaks of the "representatives" of the petty bourgeoisie
who

> According to their education and their individual position they may be as far apart as heaven and earth. What makes them representatives of the petty bourgeoisie is the fact that in their minds they do not get beyond the limits which the latter do not get beyond in life, that they are consequently driven, theoretically, to the same problems and solutions to which material interest and social position drive the latter practically. This is, in general, the relationship between the political and literary representatives of a class and the class they represent.[^9.brumaire]

[^9.brumaire]: Karl Marx, [*Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon*, ch 3.](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1852/18th-brumaire/ch03.htm)

Therefore, class position is a concept which belongs to the
analysis of the political conjuncture. It is in the "current
movement" of the political struggle that individuals group
themselves into defined class positions. Of course the basis
of this class position is class location, but it is not restricted
to this. Isolated elements or groups belonging to other
classes can join with and struggle for a class which is not
their own.

Class location creates, as we have seen, a class instinct
which causes the members of that class to tend to take the
side of the class to which they belong.

In order to arrive at a proletarian class position, the class
instinct of the proletariat only needs to be educated; 
contrariwise, for the petty bourgeois intellectuals to succeed in
reaching a proletarian class position, their class instinct
must be revolutionized.

As a result, for them
to attain a proletarian class position requires a long
process. Often petty bourgeois intellectuals join the
proletarian party because they have become convinced of
the truth and the political efficacy of Marxist analysis, but in
difficult political conjunctures, they fall into petty bourgeois
positions. That is why Marxism gives such profound
importance to the social composition of a proletarian party.
The greater the number of members of the party with a
proletarian class situation, the easier it will be to avoid leftist
or rightist deviations which are the expression of petty
bourgeois ideology in the ranks of the proletariat.

### Social Forces

Much confusion about the concept of class comes from
certain texts of Marx which have been interpreted in such a
way as to deny the class character of a social group which, in
spite of being in a determined situation in the economic
structure of a social formation, has not participated in a
unified way in the political struggle.

In other texts Marx does not deny the class character of a
group which has not participated in the political struggle,
but he refers to it as a "class in itself" as opposed to
a "class for itself" -- that is, a class which participates in
the political struggle.

> Economic conditions had first transformed the mass of the people of the country into workers.
The combination of capital has created for this mass a common situation, common interests. This
mass is thus already a class as against capital, but not yet for itself.

The terminology used by Lenin and Mao seems more adequate
to us.
They speak of *social class* when speaking at the level of
the mode of production and social formation, and introduce
the term ***social force*** to analyze the action of these
classes at the level of the political conjuncture.

A social group can constitute a class and not a social force,
as, for example, do the petty peasant producers of certain
countries.

Conversely, some social groups can constitute a social
force without belonging to any of the classes of a
social formation, like revolutionary intellectuals for example.

For a class or social group to constitute a social force,
it need not be organized into a political party per se, as
some have seemingly taken away from some of Marx's texts.
It is enough that its existence be reflected in some way
in the correlation of forces at the level of the conjuncture.
That is, that it produce "relevant effects", to use the
Poulantzas' terminology. This is the case for the small-holding
peasants analyzed by Marx in *The Eighteenth Brumaire*.
In the concrete conjuncture of Bonapartism, Marx recognized
the role that the small-holders had played despite having
neither their own organization nor their own ideology.
They constituted a social force due to the existence of
as a class which was reflected in that concrete conjuncture
by the historical phenomenon of Bonapartism, which would
not have existed without the small-holding peasants.

Louis Bonaparte considered himself the representative
of the small-holding peasants, even though he was in
reality the "representative" of the bourgeoisie. Despite that,
the economic existence of the small-holding peasants was
reflected on the political level by "relevant effects" which
were the *particular form of the state* of Bonapartism as
a historical phenomenon.
Here we are dealing with a new element, easily perceived,
which is the particular form of the state in the Second Empire,
a form which cannot be fit within the frame of the parliamentary
state which preceded it[^9.20].

[^9.20]: Nicos Poulantzas, *Political Power and Social Classes* (NLB, 1973), p. 79.

If this had not occurred, if the existence of the peasantry
as a class had not been reflected in the phenomenon of
Bonapartism, this class doubtlessly would have had some
kind of presence on the political level

> if only for the simple fact that the political organization of other classes, as well as the institutions of the state, would have had to take into account the existence of small-holding peasants, in the case of suffrage, for example. However, in this case, their presence would not have constituted a new element -- it would not have had "relevant effects" -- but would only have been inserted as a variation into the boundaries circumscribed by the relevant effects of other elements -- for example, into the framework of constitutional democracy.[^9.21]

[^9.21]: Ibid., p. 80.

Now then, in a revolutionary process, it is necessary to
distinguish three kinds of forces:

- *motor forces*
- *the principal force*
- *the directing force.*

*The motor forces* are those constituted by the social
groups which actively participate in the revolutionary
process.

*The principal force* is constituted by the social
group which represents the numerically largest motor force.

*The directing force* is constituted by the group that
directs the revolutionary process. It is not necessary
to be the numerically largest motor force to direct
the revolutionary process. What makes something
as a directing force is not its number, but its political
role. That is, its capacity to take the initiative, to
formulate appropriate goals at each stage, and to
find the right ways to lead the situation.
In this way, it gains the confidence of the revolutionary
masses who then follow its leadership unwaveringly.

The case of the Chinese Revolution illustrates
these three kinds of forces very clearly.
The motor forces were constituted by the peasantry,
the proletariat, and the urban petty bourgeoisie 
(sometimes managing to incorporate certain sectors of
the national bourgeoisie). The principal force was,
without a doubt, the peasantry. The proletariat,
despite its small numbers, succeeded in making itself
the directing force of the revolution due to the
political role it played in the Chinese Revolution.

It is very important not to confuse the principal
force with the directing force of a revolution.

In certain Latin American countries for example,
the conditions of extreme poverty of the peasantry,
its great revolutionary potential, and the specific
large weight which it has within the total population
of the country, makes it without a doubt the principal
force of the revolution in those countries. But
to state this is not to deny the proletariat its
directing role in the revolutionary process.
It is *objectively* the only class, due to
its class location (i.e., its location in social
production), which is capable of
leading the revolutionary process to its conclusion:
the suppression of every kind of exploitation.

## Conclusion: The Social Classes as Bearers of Definite Structures

After what has been said in the previous sections, we can
understand what kind of relationship exists between
the social structure and social classes.

Social classes are not the *creative subjects* of social
structures. They are, on the contrary, as Marx says, the
*"bearers"* [*Träger*] of definite structures, the actors in a
drama they have not written.

Let's pause for a moment to consider this concept of
"bearer" which Marx used in *Capital* to give an
account of the relation we aim to study here.

In the first place, we should note that the German word
*Träger* has two very different meanings in English
(as in Spanish and French): "support" and "carrier"/"bearer".
The first term (support) points at the idea of
maintaining or holding something up, 
of being the base of something,
of buttressing or serving as support for something.
It is in this sense that Marx uses it when he states
"material conditions are the supports [*Träger*]
of social relations"[^9.traeger]

[^9.traeger]: TODO, needs citation from English edition of *Capital*.

The second term (carrier/bearer) denotes, contrarily, taking something upon oneself, bringing it with you.
Marx uses it in this sense when he says
"As a capitalist, he is only capital personified"[^9.personified]
and "only acts in the production process as a bearer [*Träger*] of
capital."[^9.prodproc]

[^9.personified]: Karl Marx, *Capital*, Vol 1, p. 342.
[^9.prodproc]: TODO: needs citation from English edition of *Capital*.

Through its affirmation that *classes are the bearers of
definite structures*, Marxism rejects all voluntaristic
conceptions about social classes.

It is not the classes that *create* the structures. For example,
it is not enough for a class to propose changing a structure for
it to be able to do it. Although the proletariat might want to
implement communism immediately after destroying capitalism,
it would not be able to since such a social regime
requires a very advanced development of the productive forces as
a precondition.

But to state that classes do not *create* the structures does
not imply that they cannot *act on* those structures, modifying
them within certain limits. These limits depend on particular
material conditions, which form the basis for the level of development
reached by the productive forces. Without the active participation of
the classes, the social structures tend to reproduce themselves,
overcoming the crises generated by their internal contradictions.
Radical changes to the structures only take place when the revolutionary
classes are capable of taking advantage of the crises of the system
to produce deep structural changes, that is, revolutionary changes.
This is what explains the fundamental role which Marxism attributes
to class struggle as the motor of history.

Returning now to our definition, saying that the classes are
*bearers* of definite structures is the same as saying that
they are *effects* of these structures.

Thus we can come to define the social classes as effects
that the global social structure has on the individuals participating in
social production in one way or another.

Have we thus abandoned the use of the concept of relations of 
production to define the classes?

We think this would be the case if we were to conceive of
the global social structure as a simple combination of levels
(economic, ideological, and political), as does Poulantzas.
In that case, it is theoretically impossible to study
this effect as an effect of the global structure, and one
is forced to analyze it as a series of partial effects at
the level of each regional structure.

If instead we think of the combination of the different levels of
the social structure beginning with the *relations of production*,
everything changes. For Marx, these relations serve as
the structuring center or as the matrix of the social totality,
as we have seen in studying the concept of mode of production.
And, therefore, it is these relations which serve as the foundation
for the constitution of social classes.
To deny this, labelling it as an economistic deviation, is to
deny the fundamental contribution of Marxism to the study of
the social classes, and is therefore a regression for Marxist
thought.

Finally, we want to clarify that it's one thing to speak of
the classes as *effects* of the global social structure, which
ultimately just means they are fundamentally an effect of
the relations of production. It's another thing to speak of
*the effects that classes can produce* at the different levels of
society: ideological effects, political effects, or economic
effects. When we refer to these effects, we are referring to
the concrete practice of these classes. This practice will
be studied in the next chapter.

## Summary

In this chapter we discussed the Marxist concept of
social class. We first defined it at the level of mode of
production in order to later examine the new attributes it
acquires at the level of social formation and at the level of
political conjuncture. Finally, we made precise the definition
of classes as "bearers" of definite structures.

We have seen the following concepts of the general theory of
historical materialism:

- social class
- class fraction
- class interest
- class consciousness
- class instinct
- class structure
- transitional class
- class location
- class position
- social force
- motor force
- principal force
- directing force

### Questions
1. What state did Marx leave his study of the social classes in when he died?
2. What was Marx's innovation with respect to the social
  classes?
3. How are the social classes defined at the level of the
  mode of production?
4. Why does Marx speak of three classes when he refers to
  the capitalist system?
5. How many classes exist in each mode of production?
6. What is the relation between the reproduction of the
  mode of production and the social classes?
7. Do all the individuals in a society belong to a given
  class?
8. What is a class fraction?
9. What is immediate, spontaneous interest?
10. What is class interest?
11. What is class consciousness?
12. What is class instinct?
13. Can the proletariat spontaneously acquire a proletarian
  class consciousness?
14. What is class structure?
15. Why do the social classes acquire new attributes at
  the level of the social formation? What kinds, for example?
16. What is a transitional class?
17. Can you explain why the word "bearer" is used to define
  the role of the classes?
18. What is class location?
19. What is class position?
20. What is a social force?
21. What are the motor forces?
22. What is a principal force?
23. What is a directing force?
24. Does Marxism reduce the social classes to merely
  economic categories?
25. Why does Marx not define the social classes by using
  income differences as criteria?

### Themes for Reflection
1. What prior knowledge is needed to make a scientific
  analysis of the social classes in Latin America?
2. Why is the criterion of greater or lesser exploitation not a
  Marxist criterion for the definition of the revolutionary
  possibilities of a class?
3. What are the effects of the action of imperialism on the Latin
  American class structure?
