# Class Struggle

## The Concept of Class Struggle

At the level of the political conjuncture the social classes
can only be conceived of through their "class practices", and
since classes are groups with opposing interests, these class
practices have the character of class struggle. And it is
precisely this *class struggle*, going on within the limits fixed
by the social structure, which, in class societies, is the motor
of history.

Of course Marx did not discover either classes or class
struggle. His great contribution was to pass from the
description of the existence of social classes to the understanding of
the origin of these classes, and, therefore, he was able to give
us the **law** *which rules the class struggle*.

This is what Engels tells us in the following text:

> It was precisely Marx who had first discovered the great law of motion of history, the law according to which all historical struggles, whether they proceed in the political, religious, philosophical or some other ideological domain, are in fact only the more or less clear expression of struggles of social classes, and that the existence and thereby the collisions, too, between these classes are in turn conditioned by the degree of development of their economic position, by the mode of their production and of their exchange determined by it. This law, which has the same significance for history as the law of the transformation of energy has for natural science.[^10.1]

[^10.1]: Friedrich Engels, [*Preface to the Third German Edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1885/prefaces/18th-brumaire.htm).

Let us see now what is meant by class struggle. Is class
struggle the confrontation which takes place between the
workers of one factory or trade and their bosses? Let us look
at how Lenin responded to this question:

> No, this is only a weak embryo of it. The struggle of the workers becomes a class struggle only when all the foremost representatives of the entire working class of the whole country are conscious of themselves as a single working class and launch a struggle that is directed, not against individual employers, but against the entire class of capitalists and against the government that supports that class. Only when the individual worker realises that he is a member   of the entire working class, only when he recognises the fact that his petty day-to-day struggle against individual employers and individual government officials is a struggle against the entire bourgeoisie and the entire government, does his struggle become a class struggle[^10.2]

[^10.2]: Lenin, [*Our Immediate Task*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1899/articles/arg3oit.htm).

***Class struggle*** *is the confrontation which is produced
between two antagonistic classes when they are struggling
for their class interests.*

The class struggle appears when one class opposes
another in *action*, and, therefore, it only appears in a given
moment in the development of a society. In other phases of
its evolution the class struggle can only appear in embryonic
forms as in the case of the isolated struggles between the
workers of some factories and their bosses, or in the
struggles which, although they mobilize the whole class, do
not succeed in raising the struggle to the level of its true class
interests; or as in *hidden, latent* struggles when there is not
open struggle but latent discontent, silent opposition.[^10.3]

[^10.3]: Nikolai Bukharin, *Historical Materialism*.

The class struggle takes place on three levels, which
correspond to the three levels or regional structures which
form part of the overall social structure.

a. *Economic struggle* (at the level of the economic structure).
b. *Ideological struggle* (at the level of the ideological structure).
c. *Political struggle* (at the level of the political structure).

## The Different Kinds of Class Struggle

<!-- TODO Formatting -->

a. *The economic struggle* is the confrontation which is
	produced between the antagonistic classes at the level of the
	economic struggle. This confrontation is characterized by
	the resistance which the exploited classes put up at this level
	against the exploiting classes.

    Lenin defines the economic struggle of the proletariat in 	the following way:

	> The economic struggle is the collective struggle of the
	workers against their employers for better terms in *the
	sale of their labor power*, for better living and working
	conditions. This struggle is necessarily a trade-union
	struggle, because the working conditions differ greatly in
	different trades, and, consequently, the struggle to
	*improve* them can only be conducted on the basis of trade
	organizations [^10.4]
	
	[^10.4]: Lenin, [*What is to be Done?*, Section III, part A](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1901/witbd/iii.htm).
	
b. *The ideological struggle*. The class struggle is also
present at the ideological level as a struggle between the
ideology of the exploited class and the ideology of the
exploiting class.[^10.5]

  In capitalist society, this struggle is a struggle between
*bourgeois ideology* in all its manifest forms and *proletarian
ideology* based on the Marxist theory of history.

  This struggle, to be successful, must, in contrast to the
other forms of struggle, attack the enemy where he is
strongest, that is, where the best exponents of ruling class
ideology are to be found. Often this ideology is criticized by
oversimplifying it or choosing its weakest supporters. This
frequently allows the enemy to advance rather than forcing
him to retreat.[^10.6]

c. *The political struggle*. The political struggle is the
confrontation which is produced between the classes in their
struggle for political power, that is, in the struggle to make
state power their own.

  This is what Lenin says:

  > Every class struggle is a political struggle. We know that the opportunists, slaves to the ideas of liberalism, understood these profound words of Marx incorrectly and tried to put a distorted interpretation on them. Among the opportunists there were, for instance, the Economists, the elder brothers of the liquidators. The Economists believed that any clash between classes was a political struggle. The Economists therefore recognised as “class struggle” the struggle for a wage increase of five kopeks on the ruble, and refused to recognise a higher, more developed, nation-wide *class* struggle, the struggle for *political aims*. The Economists, therefore, recognised the embryonic class struggle but did not recognise it in its developed form. The Economists recognised, in other words, only that part of the class struggle that was more tolerable to the liberal bourgeoisie, they refused to go farther than the liberals, they refused to recognise the higher form of class struggle that is unacceptable to the liberals. By so doing, the Economists became liberal workers’ politicians. By so doing, the Economists rejected the Marxist, revolutionary conception of the class struggle.\
  >
  > To continue. It is not enough that the class struggle be comes real, consistent and developed only when it embraces the sphere of politics. In politics, too, it is possible to restrict oneself to minor matters, and it is possible to go   deeper, to the very foundations. Marxism recognises a class struggle as fully developed, “nation-wide”, *only* if it does not merely embrace politics but takes in the most significant thing in politics—the organisation of state power.\
  >
  > On the other hand, the liberals, when the working-class movement has grown a little stronger, dare not deny the class struggle but attempt to narrow down, to curtail and emasculate the concept of class struggle. Liberals are prepared to recognise the class struggle in the sphere of politics, too, but on one condition—that the organisation of state power should *not* enter into that sphere. It is not hard to under stand which of the bourgeoisie’s class interests give rise to the liberal distortion of the concept of class struggle.[^10.7]

[^10.7]: Lenin, [*Liberal and Marxist Conceptions of the Class Struggle*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1913/may/31b.htm).

From what has been said above we can conclude that
there are three fundamental kinds of class struggle:
economic, ideological and political.

However, these different kinds of struggle do not
exist separated from one another, but are fused into a single
unity which constitutes the class struggle as such or the
confrontation of one class with another.

Thus, in every conjuncture there is a certain form of fusion
of these different kinds of struggle, in which one plays a
dominant role. In a given historical moment the ideological
struggle can be the strategic nodal point of the class struggle,
in other cases it can be the political or economic struggle.
How, then, should we interpret Marx's statement that all
class struggle is a political struggle?

We think that this statement must be understood in the
sense that the definitive confrontation of the antagonistic
classes is only produced when the oppressed class comes to
question the system of power which makes its condition of
exploitation possible. In order for there to be a real class
confrontation neither the economic nor the ideological
struggle alone is sufficient. It is necessary to advance to the
level of political struggle, of the struggle for power. It is only
in this moment that the class struggle acquires its full
meaning. Until then it is only a question of partial
confrontations which do not question the system which
allows for the reproduction of the antagonistic classes such
as they are. For this reason, Lenin says that the

> struggle of the workers becomes a class struggle only when all the foremost representatives of the entire working class of the whole country are conscious of themselves as a single working class and launch a struggle that is directed, not against individual employers, but against the *entire class* of capitalists and against the government that supports that class.[^10.8]

[^10.8]: Lenin, [*Our Immediate Task*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1899/articles/arg3oit.htm).

But to affirm that the political struggle is the class struggle
*par excellence* does not imply denying the importance of the
economic struggle. The necessity of this struggle has been
recognized from the beginning by Marxism.

Marx and Engels criticized the utopian socialists for
deprecating this kind of struggle. In the resolutions of the
Congress of the International Working Men's Association
in 1866 they warned against two deviations: 
exaggerating its importance and underestimating it.
Before
going on to the next point, let us clarify two concepts that
are commonly confused: "the political" and "politics".

We understand "the political" to mean the juridico-political
structure of a society. In this sense, the political
struggle is a struggle on the field or level of "the political".

We mean by "politics" the terrain of political action. That
is, the class struggle in a given political conjuncture.

<!-- TODO: Diagram. !-->
```mermaid
graph TD;
```


## The Forms of Class Struggle

Each one of these kinds of struggle which develops in a
given front or level can take different forms: legal or illegal,
peaceful or violent.

For example, on the economic front: strikes, hunger marches,
slowdowns, factory takeovers, etc.

On the ideological front: publications, radio and
television broadcasts of a revolutionary orientation;
revolutionary utilization of political concentrations and
electoral campaigns, etc.

On the political front: electoral struggle, armed
insurrection, popular war (with its different forms: guerilla
war, wars of position, and war of movement, etc.).

Now let us look at what, according to Lenin, are the
fundamental requirements which every Marxist must meet
when examining the question of the forms of struggle.

<!-- TODO Formatting -->

> In the first place, Marxism differs from all primitive forms of socialism by not binding the movement to any one particular form of struggle. It recognises the most varied forms of struggle; and it does not “concoct” them, but only generalises, organises, gives conscious expression to those forms of struggle of the revolutionary classes which arise of themselves in the course of the movement. Absolutely hostile to all abstract formulas and to all doctrinaire recipes, Marxism demands an attentive attitude to the *mass* struggle in progress, which, as the movement develops, as the class-consciousness of the masses grows, as economic and political crises become acute, continually gives rise to new and more varied methods of defence and attack. Marxism, therefore, positively does not reject any form of struggle. Under no circumstances does Marxism confine itself to the forms of struggle possible and in existence at the given moment only, recognising as it does that new forms of struggle, unknown to the participants of the given period, *inevitably* arise as the given social situation, changes. In this respect Marxism *learns*, if we may so express it, from mass practice, and makes no claim what ever to teach the masses forms of struggle invented by "systematisers" in the seclusion of their studies. We know -- said Kautsky, for instance, when examining the forms of social revolution -- that the coming crisis will introduce new forms of struggle that we are now unable to foresee. 
>
> In the second place, Marxism demands an absolutely *historical* examination of the question of the forms of struggle. To treat this question apart from the concrete historical situation betrays a failure to understand the rudiments of dialectical materialism. At different stages of economic evolution, depending on differences in political, national-cultural, living and other conditions, different forms of struggle come to the fore and become the principal forms of struggle; and in connection with this, the secondary, auxiliary forms of struggle undergo change in their ·turn. To attempt to answer yes or no to the question whether any particular means of struggle should be used, without making a detailed examination of the concrete situation of the given movement at the given stage of its development, means completely to abandon the Marxist position.
>
> These are the two principal theoretical propositions by which we must be guided.[^10.9]

[^10.9]: Lenin, [*Guerrilla Warfare*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1906/gw/i.htm#v11pp65-213).

Therefore, Marxism holds that the class struggle can take
different forms. It maintains that the role which a given form
of struggle can play can only be judged according to the
political conjuncture of that moment, and, finally, that it is
the Marxist-Leninist party which must "generalize,
organize, and give a conscious character to the
revolutionary class struggles." The party must decide in each
moment which form of struggle should occupy the principal
role, and how the other forms ought to be subordinated to
the principal form. To proclaim that Marxism accepts all
forms of struggle does not exempt the revolutionary party
from deciding which of these forms should be preponderant
and how to organize the rest of the forms to support this.

## Strategy and Tactics in the Class Struggle
But a Marxist-Leninist party cannot limit itself to
following the forms of struggle which arise spontaneously
from the working masses. It must raise these forms of
struggle so that they are transformed into the most adequate
means to meet their class interest.

Class interests cannot always be realized immediately.
Often it is necessary to go through a first stage where you can
only prepare the groundwork for fulfilling those interests. In
a first stage, for example, the proletariat could unite with the
peasantry and certain popular sectors to complete
bourgeois-democratic tasks. Later, in another stage, after
having demonstrated its capacity as the leading force in
bourgeois-democratic tasks, the proletarian party based in
the popular masses could begin to carry out the tasks of the
definitive suppression of social exploitation. This was the
case, for example, of the Chinese and the Cuban
revolutions.

Therefore, assuming the necessity for a first stage of
struggle, a stage which probably would not be necessary in
the advanced capitalist countries, every revolutionary part)
must establish a *minimum program*[^10.minprog] in which the goals of
the first stage would be represented and a *maximum
program* which would aim at finally bringing about the
suppression of all exploitation.

[^10.minprog]: A minimum program which is the best program for that stage
  and, therefore, the only truly revolutionary program since it is the
  only one which lets the process advance. Many programs more
  revolutionary on paper can become a brake for the revolution if
  they try to be carried out immediately. To clarify what we mean, we
  shall pose an example: if a patriotic army still not sufficiently
  strong is trying to liberate its country from a very powerful enemy
  army which has invaded it, it must concentrate all of its forces to
  win. It would be incorrect to try to liberate the whole country all at
  once, dispersing its scarce forces. To truly liberate the whole
  territory and not face defeat in the first battle, the army must first
  liberate certain strategic zones, which permit it to most rapidly
  weaken the enemy, while still leaving, for the time being, other
  zones in its hands.

  The ideal would be to liberate all the zones at the same time, but
  when the ideal does not correspond to the reality of the balance of
  forces, to try to do it, no matter the cost, becomes, in the last
  analysis, the principal obstacle to victory. Only by advancing
  through stages can the final objective be reached: to liberate all the
  zones in the enemy's hands. This in no way implies that it is
  necessary to demobilize the non-strategic zones, so that they wait
  with arms folded for their final liberation. Quite the contrary, these
  zones must be mobilized, but their actions must be coordinated
  with and subordinated to the principal objective.

After having established the minimum program
appropriate to the first stage of development of the class
struggle, it becomes necessary to devise a *general strategy of
struggle* to achieve the program's objectives.

But it is not enough to formulate a general strategy. In
order to achieve these strategic goals, it is necessary to be
able to mobilize the masses, since *without the participation
of the masses there can be no revolution*. And to mobilize
the masses it is necessary to begin with their spontaneous,
immediate interests. You cannot offer abstract formulas to
the masses, you must provide concrete proposals for action
that correspond to the political conjuncture of each
moment.

These concrete proposals for action constitute the
different *tactics* of a party. *Political slogans* are only short
phrases in which the party synthesizes these concrete
proposals for action. Only a party which has contact with
the masses, which recognizes their immediate interests,
which recognizes their revolutionary potential and which
knows where it must lead them can establish adequate
slogans for each historical moment. The correctness of the
tactical positions of a revolutionary party leads the masses
to recognize it as its vanguard.

The parties which lack contact with the masses tend to put
forth *abstract slogans* which can be correct from a strategic
point of view but which lack meaning for the masses since
they do not appear related in any way to their immediate,
spontaneous interests.

*It is, therefore, in struggle and not in declarations where
the true revolutionary vanguard is recognized.*

## The Social Revolution: the Ultimate Form of the Class Struggle

To the degree to which the contradictions of a society
develop the class struggle acquires a sharper character, until
the moment comes when the oppressed classes succeed in
seizing political power and begin to destroy the old relations
of production.

The conscious and violent process of destruction of the
old relations of production and, therefore, of the social
classes which are their bearers, is what Marxism calls *social
revolution*.[^10.10]

[^10.10]: This has nothing in common with the simple process of achieving
political independence (the independence of Latin American
countries) nor with a simple change in government through a
military takeover.

Every social revolution is the result of a combination of
subjective and objective factors. The objective factors are
the objective changes taking place in the national and
international conjuncture. They are the material base of the
revolution. The totality of objective factors necessary for the
unleashing of a revolution constitute what Lenin called the
**revolutionary situation**.

Let us see what he says in respect to this point in his
article, "The Collapse of the Second International," written
two years before the October Revolution:

> To the Marxist it is indisputable that a revolution is impossible without a revolutionary situation; furthermore, it is not every revolutionary situation that leads to revolution. What, generally speaking, are the symptoms of a revolutionary situation? We shall certainly not be mistaken if we indicate the following three major symptoms: (1) when it is impossible for the ruling classes to maintain their rule without any change; when there is a crisis, in one form or another, among the “upper classes”, a crisis in the policy of the ruling class, leading to a fissure through which the discontent and indignation of the oppressed classes burst forth. For a revolution to take place, it is usually insufficient for “the lower classes not to want” to live in the old   way; it is also necessary that “the upper classes should be unable” to live in the old way; (2) when the suffering and want of the oppressed classes have grown more acute than usual; (3) when, as a consequence of the above causes, there is a considerable increase in the activity of the masses, who uncomplainingly allow themselves to be robbed in “peace time”, but, in turbulent times, are drawn both by all the circumstances of the crisis *and by the “upper classes” themselves* into independent historical action. 
>
> Without these objective changes, which are independent of the will, not only of individual groups and parties but even of individual classes, a revolution, as a general rule, is impossible. The totality of all these objective changes is called a revolutionary situation.[^10.11]

[^10.11]: Lenin, [*The Collapse of the Second International*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1915/csi/ii.htm#v21pp74h-212).

[^10.12]: Louis Althusser, *For Marx*, p. 95.

This revolutionary situation is defined by Louis Althusser
as "an accumulation and exacerbation of historical
conditions"[^10.12] which fuse into a ruptural unity. But history
has known numerous cases of revolutionary situations
which were not turned into victorious revolutions, for
instance in Germany in the 1860s, in Russia in 1905, in the
first year of the first imperialist world war in various
countries in Europe, etc. This shows us that objective
conditions are not enough. In order to move from a
revolutionary situation to a victorious revolution it is
necessary to add the *subjective conditions* to the objective
conditions:

> it is not every revolutionary situation that gives rise to a revolution; revolution arises only out of a situation in which the above-mentioned objective changes are accompanied by a subjective change, namely, the ability of the revolutionary *class* to take revolutionary mass action *strong*
enough to break (or dislocate) the old government, which never, not even in a period of crisis, “falls”, if it is not toppled over.[^10.13]

[^10.13]: Lenin, op. cit.

It is important to point out that these objective and
subjective conditions which were for Lenin the necessary
conditions for the triumph of a general insurrection cannot
be used, therefore as a criterion to decide at what moment a
prolonged popular war ought to begin, which has as one of
its objectives, precisely, the creation of the conditions for a
social revolution.

## Summary

In this chapter we have looked at what we mean by class
struggle, the different kinds of class struggle ( economic,
political, and ideological), the different forms in which these
struggles can take place: legal or illegal, peaceful and
violent, what should be the attitude of a Marxist-Leninist
party towards them, and the strategy and tactics of the class
struggle, concluding with an analysis of the objective and
subjective conditions of the social revolution, the highest
form of class struggle.

### Questions
1. What is class struggle?
2. What is economic struggle?
3. What is ideological struggle?
4. What is political struggle?
5. What is the "political structure"?
6. What do we mean by 'political'?
7. What do we mean by kinds of struggle?
8. What do we mean by form of struggle?
9. What is the Marxist thesis about forms of struggle?
10. What is a minimum program?
11. What is a maximum program?
12. Is only a maximum program revolutionary?
13. When is a political party carrying out a correct tactic?
14. What are the considerations which we must take into
  account in order to put forward a correct political slogan?
15. What is a social revolution?
16. What is a revolutionary situation?
17. What are the objective conditions of a revolution?
18. What are the subjective conditions of a revolution?

### Themes for Reflection
1. Is it possible to combine electoral struggle with armed
  struggle?
2. When is a minimum program a revolutionary program?
3. What elements should you take into account to
  formulate the strategy which the revolution in your country
  ought to follow?
4. What are the minimum conditions necessary to
  successfully launch a prolonged popular war?

[^10.5]: In the chapter on ideology we saw the existence 
of different ideological tendencies corresponding to
the different social classes.

 [^10.6]: "In the ideological struggle... the defeat of auxiliaries and lesser
figures has an almost insignificant importance; here it is vital that
ones most eminent opponents be combatted.... A science obtains
proof of its effectiveness and vitality when it demonstrates that it
knows how to confront the great champions of opposing
tendencies, when it resolves, by its own means, the vital problems
which they have posed, or otherwise shows that these problems are
false ones." Antonio Gramsci, *Historical Materialism and the Philosophy of Benedetto Croce*.
